1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )          ISCR Case No. 08-02471
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 17, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On July 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on September 11, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
November 5, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 3, 2008, and I
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on December 15, 2008. The Government offered
Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her
own behalf and submitted no documents at the hearing. At the request of Applicant, the
record remained open until December 22, 2008, to allow Applicant to offer post hearing
documents. She offered into evidence three character letters, and a Performance
2
Evaluation, which have been marked as Exhibits A through D respectively, and entered
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
December 23, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 24 years old, and a high school graduate with one year of college.
She is unmarried, and she has no children. 
Applicant works for a defense contractor as a survey specialist, and she seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
1.a. On November 16, 2005, Applicant was taken into custody in California, after
crossing the border from Mexico into the United States with an illegal alien hiding in the
trunk of the car, in which she was riding as a passenger. The initial charges against her
were (1) Bringing illegal aliens into the United States, and (2) Alien smuggling. She was
detained in jail overnight, and on the following day she signed an agreement with the
United States that if she participated in this illegal activity again, she would be arrested
and prosecuted. She was released, and no charges were brought against her. 
Applicant testified that at the time of this event she was 21 years of age. On the
day of the incident Applicant received a telephone call from her cousin, asking Applicant
if she would like to accompany her cousin on a ride to Tijuana to pick up a relative of
her cousin’s boyfriend from the Tijuana airport, and bring him back to the United States.
Applicant stated that she had done this with her cousin on two previous occasions.  She
agreed to accompany her on this date.  
She testified that they picked up the individual from the Tijuana airport, and as
they were preparing to reenter the United States, her cousin stopped the vehicle,
opened the trunk of her vehicle, and the individual whom they had picked up got into the
trunk. Applicant then asked, “What are you doing?” It was then that she was first
informed that he did not have the proper paperwork to enter the United States legally.
Applicant testified that she had no prior suspicion of what they would be doing, since the
previous two times they had transferred someone from the Tijuana airport into the U.S.,
the person had the proper paperwork and simply sat in the vehicle and entered legally. 
Applicant testified that when she realized what they were doing on this trip, she
knew that it was wrong, and she protested this action to her cousin. However, since she
was in unfamiliar territory in Tijuana, Mexico, and it was the middle of the night, she was
3
afraid for her safety, and she simply did not know what to do. As they attempted to
cross into the United States the Border Patrol stopped the vehicle and found the
individual hiding in the trunk. Both she and her cousin were searched and handcuffed,
and ultimately they were fingerprinted and their pictures were taken. 
They were both detained overnight in jail, and in the morning Applicant signed a
document, stating that if she was involved in this conduct in the future she would be
arrested and charged with committing a felony. Thereafter, both she and her cousin
were released and they had no further requirements.
Applicant testified credibly as to her remorse over being involved in this incident,
and that she would never engage in such conduct in the future.   She also reiterated
that with the exception of this event, she has never been arrested or involved in any
other illegal conduct. Finally, she testified that if she ever found herself in a similar
circumstance she would exit the vehicle and call to have someone else come and take
her home. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she has engaged in criminal conduct. 
2.a. Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 1, constitutes criminal
conduct. At the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice
of 8 United States Code section 1324. I find that Applicant’s action did constitute a
violation of that code section, as she attempted to bring an alien into the United States
in a manner other than through a designated port of entry or place other than as
designated by the Commissioner. 
Mitigation
Applicant offered into evidence three character letters from individuals who have
known her in her professional capacity (Exhibits A through C). They all were extremely
laudatory and described Applicant as “ honest and reliable,” and “one of our brightest,
hardest working, and trusted employee’s (sic)!”
Finally, Applicant also submitted her Performance Evaluation, dated August 24,
2007. In all categories she was rated Good, with an Outstanding rating as to treating her
supervisors with respect, and cooperation with others. She was rated overall as a “good
employee and a valued member of the team”, with her “skills growing on a daily basis.”
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
4
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant’s conduct
exhibited questionable judgement, and a potential unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations. However, I do not find that Applicant’s conduct falls under any of the
5
Disqualifying Conditions (DC). While she did engage in criminal conduct as will be
discussed below, the circumstances involved in her conduct were rather unique. First
she did not have any advanced notice of the conduct and only learned that her cousin
was planning to transport an illegal alien into the U.S., when they were in Tijuana,
Mexico, late at night. While she should have refused to remain in the vehicle when she
realized what her cousin intended to do, it is understandable that a young girl in these
circumstances would be frightened and not sure what the would be the proper action
she should take.
 I resolve Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct, for Applicant.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The Government also established that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct, by
being involved in the illegal transportation of an alien into the United States, which is a
violation of  8 United States Code section 1324. 
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions, I find that DC 31. (a), a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this case. DC 31. (c), allegations or
admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
is also applicable to this case. 
However, I find that MC (a) is applicable, as this conduct happened under
unusual circumstances as reviewed above, it is highly unlikely to recur again, and it
does not cast doubt on the Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness and good
judgement. MC (d) also applies as I find successful rehabilitation, since no criminal
conduct has occurred in more than three years, Applicant expressed sincere remorse,
and the positive character letters and Performance Evaluation, is strong evidence of a
good employment record. 
Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct, is found for Applicant
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
6
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines E and J, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, as to why the mitigating Adjudicative
Guidelines apply, the youth of the Applicant at the time of the incident, the facts
surrounding the incident, her genuine contrition, and her positive recommendations and
Performance Evaluation, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant
questions or  doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude that at this time,
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
