1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-06521
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA) on February 6,
2008. On July 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006. 
Applicant submitted her notarized answer to the SOR on August 13, 2008. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on October 7, 2008, and the hearing was held on October 28,
2008. At the hearing, four exhibits (GE 1 through 4) were admitted in evidence without
objection to support the Government’s case. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits
(AE A through AE V). In the time allowed for Applicant to furnish additional
documentation, she submitted AE W through AE Y, which were received in evidence
 Applicant encountered health problems related to her birth.1
 Applicant testified the date was December 2007; however, she divorced her husband in February 2007 (GE2
1). Based on the intense conflict she had with him in the period leading up to the divorce, it would be highly
unlikely for him to still be in her house in December 2007. 
2
without objection. These exhibits contain a processed check, Applicant’s pay stub, and
a personal financial statement dated November 10, 2008. DOHA received a copy of the
transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings on November 6, 2008. Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $27,865.00 under the financial
considerations guideline. SOR 1.d. is the only account Applicant denied because she
had her own account, and her former husband added her name as secondary user. In
view of the progress Applicant has made in satisfying the other accounts, I am confidant
Applicant will have the credit agencies remove the SOR 1.d. account from her credit
profile. SOR 1.d. is resolved in her favor. 
The period of time in which the listed SOR debts fell delinquent is between 2003
and April 2005. Applicant blamed her financial indebtedness on her former husband and
his inability to maintain employment because of his unexplained difficulty in handling
supervision (Tr. 65). She married him in May 1996. During three months of her
pregnancy and recovery from having her baby in July 1999, he was unemployed (Tr.
41). They could not make ends meet on her long-term disability,  amounting to 60% of1
her income, so they had to live off credit cards for a while (Id.) Because of her
husband’s employment issues, their financial problems persisted. Applicant’s life
improved economically when her husband moved out of the house in December 2006.2
She has not had to pay his car insurance, and the household expenses and utilities
have dropped, making more funds available for other debts (Tr. 67). The only wish that
Applicant has is for her former husband to spend more time with his son. In addition to
child support, the divorce decree (AE A1) requires him to pay for the cost of 50% of his
son’s extra-curricular activities. As AE M indicates, the former husband has had trouble
complying with the requirement.  
Regarding Applicant’s future intentions of becoming debt free, she stated:
So as I will continue to show through my exhibits and things that I
presented you, that even though I - - we’ve gone through the divorce, I’m
still making it. I pray everyday, and I work, and I pay all my debts as fast
as I can. Before the clearance thing came up, I had already started
making payments in December of 2007 to a couple of the other creditors
that show up on my statement of reasons. And matter of fact, one of them
will clear on December of this year. (Id.).
3
Applicant noticed two overdue debts on her credit report that were not listed in
the SOR. She testified:
So with all this being said, I think once we go through each one and see
what we’ve paid, I’ve paid a lot of things off and am currently making
payments on everything else, and including, but not limited to but including
in the last set of exhibits I showed you, there were two items that I offered
into exhibits that was not on my statement of reasons, but I noticed them
on my credit report that were not satisfied, so I ensured that they were
satisfied before I came today (Tr.42). 
SOR 1.a. $364.00. This account fell delinquent in April 2004. In her response to
the SOR, Applicant promised to pay the debt. She settled the account for $291.00 on
October 26, 2008 (AE A). 
SOR 1.b. $435.00. The account became delinquent in April 2005. Applicant
agreed to settle the account in three payments; Applicant provided proof she made two
of three scheduled payments on September 26 and October 10, and is scheduled to
make the final payment on October 29, 2008 (AE B). The entire settlement is $390.00. 
SOR 1.c. $390.00. The delinquency date for this account was in April 2005.
Applicant settled the account in two payments, September 12, 2008 and September 26,
2008 (AE C). 
SOR 1.d. $517.00. As noted in her response to the SOR, and at the hearing,
Applicant denies this account is her responsibility. She was advised to contact the credit
agencies but has not done so (Tr. 49; AE D).
SOR 1.e. $497.00. Applicant settled this account for $326.00 on September 26,
2008, and was notified by the collection firm on October 21, 2008 that there was a zero
balance on this account (AE E). 
SOR 1.f. $7,828.00. In February 2005, the creditor reported this account
delinquent. On December 17, 2007, Applicant entered in a consent order to pay
$150.00 a month until debt is satisfied; she has made nine payments (AE F). She still
owes about $6,280.00.
SOR 1.g. $9,867.00. In her response to the SOR, Applicant indicated she had
not addressed this debt due to the efforts to identify and pay the other creditors. On
September 11, 2008, Applicant reached a settlement requiring her to pay this collection
firm $250.00 for the first six months, then $500.00 a month until account is paid in full.
Applicant made the first $250.00 payment in September 2008 (AE G).
SOR 1.h. $2,069.00. Applicant settled this account in full on June 17, 2008 (AE
H).
4
SOR 1.i. $439.00. On September 26, 2008, Applicant settled this account for
approximately $272.00 (AE I).
SOR 1.j. $1,648.00. Applicant has been paying $203.00 on this debt since
January 2008, and anticipates the debt will be paid in December 2008 (AE J; Tr. 53-54).
SOR 1.k. $3,811.00. To help her nephew get to work faster so he would not have
to rely on other people, Applicant provided a secondary signature of responsibility and
liability if he were to default on the car payments. After he stopped paying, the creditor
sought payment directly from her (Tr. 56). On September 8, 2008, Applicant agreed to
pay $100.00 in September and October, band then $197.00 a month in November 2008
until the debt is paid. Accruing interest has increased the debt to approximately
$7,000.00. 
Applicant is paying two debts not listed in the SOR. AT S demonstrates Applicant
has been making monthly payments of $300.00 to this unlisted creditor since 2005. She
has made 44 payments. AE T reflects her settlement of a telecommunications debt for
$268.00 (AE T). This debt is not listed in the SOR. E
Having considered the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s demeanor at
the hearing, I find Applicant’s testimony credible. Her personal financial statement (PFS)
reflects her net income monthly is about $4047.00, and her net monthly remainder is
$950.00, sufficient to accommodate the extra $250.00 she will have to pay beginning in
March 2009 to the SOR 1.g. creditor. 
Character Evidence
Applicant submitted six character statements. For seven weeks, Applicant’s
former husband fell behind on after-school tuition for Applicant’s son.  He promised to
pay the arrearage, but failed to do so. Applicant paid the delinquent amount in full to
avoid extra penalties for non-payment. 
One of Applicant’s supervisors praised her for consistently providing essential
services to the equipment specialist team since October 2005. 
The information project manager has known Applicant since November 2007. He
has received e-mails from customers desiring her to be included in the new contract that
is under negotiation. He recommends her for a position of trust. 
Applicant’s friend of seven years considers Applicant very active in her
community, and keenly interested in her child’s interests. 
Another friend who has known Applicant for 15 years, and also wrote a character
statement (AE Q), commends her for lending a sympathetic ear when the friend’s son
was deployed to the Middle East. The friend can verify that Applicant is an active church
member. Applicant’s sister, who also wrote a character statement, testified they are very
5
close, and are members of the same church. Applicant supports her sister returning to
college to attain her degree. 
Applicant’s job performance evaluation for the period June 2007 to June 2008
shows that Applicant meets expectations. She currently has about $50,000.00 in her
retirement account although she took some money out in 2005 to pay bills (Tr. 62).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
6
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
Applicant’s financial turmoil surfaced in July 1999 when she took leave from work
to have her baby. Her husband was also unemployed during her pregnancy and
childbirth. Though she received disability income after the child was born because of
birthing complications, the disability amounted to only 60% of her salary, and was
inadequate to keep current on the bills with her husband unemployed too. Applicant
turned to credit cards to meet some of the expenses, and the financial difficulties
increased. By the time the SOR was published, Applicant owed 11 creditors more than
$27,800.00. Applicant’s failure to pay the listed debts, some more than five years old,
falls within the parameters of FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19.c. (a history not meeting financial obligations).
There are four mitigating conditions (MC) that have potential application to this
case. FC mitigating condition (MC) 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment)
applies. Though Applicant accrued no new delinquent after April 2005, there are at least
11 debts. The record shows that Applicant’s indebtedness occurred as a result of her
husband’s failure to handle his share of the familial, financial responsibilities.
Fortunately, the circumstances have changed since the divorce decree was finalized in
February 2007. The divorce demonstrated Applicant’s good judgment which has
continued with Applicant’s steady progress in satisfying the listed and unlisted creditors.
Her divorce decree in February 2007 was the event that caused her financial problems
to improve. Though her former husband has yet to pay court-ordered child support, she
has used his indifference to the child’s needs as fortification for her resolve to regain
control over her financial responsibilities while fostering a wholesome environment for
her child. Even though she still owes more than $10,000.00 in debt, Applicant’s
trustworthiness on and away from the job entitles her to substantial mitigation under FC
MC 20.a. 
Applicant receives benefit from FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) based on her divorce in February 2007. While the
7
divorce probably was not really unanticipated due to the constant marital strife, the
record demonstrates repeated instances of Applicant acting responsibly under
challenging circumstances. She has contacted every creditor in the last year to work out
a pay off or some kind of repayment plan. In each case except for SOR 1.d., Applicant
has agreed to a payment plan and has completed several plans involving smaller debts,
while recording at least one payment in other plans involving the larger debts. Applicant
receives substantial mitigation under FC MC 20.a. and FC MC 20.b. 
Applicant has not been involved in financial counseling. However, over the past
three years, she has demonstrated exceptional discipline in managing her finances so
she can comply with the payment schedules. She will have to maintain this discipline for
the foreseeable future. FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or
is under control) applies even though she has a large amount to debt to repay.
The evidence under FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) provides mitigation for Applicant
based on her pay off or settlement of eight of 10 creditors, and enrollment in payment
plans with the two remaining creditors. The favorable evidence Applicant has furnished
regarding her efforts to repay her debts result in finding for Applicant under SOR 1.d.
and the FC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s
life, and a careful consideration of nine variables that comprise whole person model:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation and recurrence. ¶ 2, p.18 of
the Directive.
I have considered the disqualifying and mitigating factors in light of all the facts
and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was 36 years old when her debts
started to fall delinquent in 2003. AE S reflects that Applicant began repaying her
overdue debt in 2005. AE T indicates she paid off a debt not even listed in the SOR.
Applicant still has more than $10,000.00 to pay on the past due accounts in SOR 1.f.
and SOR 1.g. Her sustained record of regular monthly payments to three of the other
larger creditors and her favorable character evidence justify complete confidence she
will continue to pay the remaining debt until it is eliminated. Accordingly, Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns raised under the FC guideline.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
