                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05584 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has nine unpaid debts totaling approximately $35,000, which are in 
collection or have been charged off. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the 
government’s financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 17, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On October 9, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated November 13, 2008. The FORM 
contained six attachments. On November 18, 2008, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Applicant's response was due 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. 
Applicant’s response was due on December 18, 2008. As of January 15, 2009, no 
response had been received. On January 16, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations of the $19,742 
bank credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. She admitted the remaining eight debts, which 
total approximately $15,000. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old senior technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2007, and is seeking to maintain a secret security clearance. 
Applicant was granted a secret clearance in January 1985 and a confidential clearance 
in January 1980. (Item 4, p 21-22, Item 5, p 5) 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated she had contacted a credit company 
to help her with credit consolidation. Applicant states her financial difficulties were the 
result of being overextended when she was laid off from work. Applicant was 
unemployed from January 2001 through October 2001, January 2005 through April 
2005, and April 2007 through June 2007. (Item 5, p 3 and Item 4, p 5 – 10) In her SOR 
response, she did not indicated to which period of unemployment she was referring. 
Applicant stated she has “had bad credit for years while holding a clearance and it 
never affected my integrity.”  
 
Applicant has the following unpaid debts: a $303 collection agency debt (SOR ¶ 
1.a), a $5,365 collection agency debt (SOR ¶ 1.b), a $7,454 bank credit card debt (SOR 
¶ 1.d), a $266 collection agency debt collection for a telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.e), a 
$490 telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.f), a $753 bank credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.g), a $240 
clothing store credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.h), and a $340 telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.i.).  
 
Applicant denied a $19,742 bank credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.c). On Applicant’s 
June 2008 credit report, this debt is listed as a charged off account with a balance of 
$19,742. (Item 5, p 9) In Applicant’s October 2007 interview, Applicant asserts the 
original debt was her father’s credit card debt. Her father died and her mother suffered 
from Alzheimer’s disease. Applicant had the debt put in her name and arranged to pay 
$150 per month on it. Payments stopped in early 2006 when Applicant’s work hours 
 
 
 
2
were reduced. (Item 5, p 26) Applicant asserts she hired an attorney to address this 
debt. Applicant provided no documentation related to the dispute of this debt or action 
by her attorney. 
 
In the mid-1990s, Applicant obtained a $3,000 loan for moving expenses. (SOR ¶ 
1.b) In early 2005, she stopped payments on this debt when she was unemployed for a 
few months. In 2002, Applicant had a clothing company credit card (SOR ¶ 1.h), with a 
$100 limit. She stopped making payments in early 2005. In 2000, she opened two bank 
credit cards with $300 limits. (SOR ¶ 1.g) In 2005, she stopped making payments on 
these cards when her work hours were cut from 48 to 32 hours per week. (Item 5, p 22)  
 
Applicant had two telephone debts. She knows nothing about the $340 telephone 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.i). In 2004, she changed telephone service providers and was unable to 
pay the final bill due to being out of work on disability for 4 or 5 weeks. In 2006, 
Applicant opened a credit card account with a $300 limit. (SOR ¶ 1.b) She used the 
card for gasoline and car repairs. 
 
In April 2005, she obtained a job with 40 hours per week plus eight hours per 
week of overtime. Shortly after she started, her hours were reduced to 32 per week with 
no overtime. Additionally, the plant were she worked would periodically shut down for 
two weeks at a time with no pay to the employees. In October 2006, she was out of 
work on disability for five or six weeks following back surgery. In April 2007, she was 
laid off due to company consolidation and her branch plant being closed.  
 
In June 2007, she obtained her current job. In June 2008, Applicant asserts she 
was paying $100 each month to pay a $1,490 bank debt, which is not a debt of concern 
listed in the SOR. (Item 5, p 20) In October 2007, Applicant asserted she hoped to have 
a payment plan in place by the end of 2007 to address her financial problems. (Item 5, p 
24)  
 
As of October 2007, Applicant’s gross monthly income was approximately $3,000 
and her monthly expenses were $2,000. After paying her debts, Applicant’s net 
remainder was approximately $400. (Item 5, p 6) She has no credit cards.  
 
In Applicant’s October 2008 SOR response, she asserts she was addressing her 
debts in the wrong way by addressing one bill at a time. She acknowledges she should 
have sought help with her credit problems earlier. She stated she had contacted a 
company to assist her with her credit and to establish a plan to address her financial 
problems. No documentation concerning assistance provided by this company was 
presented. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
 
 
3
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
 
4
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit report, her 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, her SOR 
response, and her response to interrogatories. Applicant has admitted responsibility for 
all but one of her delinquent debts. She disputes owing a debt of approximately $20,000 
stating it was her father’s debt that she assumed. She hired an attorney to dispute this 
debt, but provided no corroboration of this dispute. She has provided insufficient 
documentation to show significant progress resolving any of her debts. There is no 
documentation that even the four smallest debts, which are each less than $350, have 
been paid or addressed. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. Her 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and did not occur under circumstances 
not likely to recur. She failed to demonstrate that her debts were largely due to 
circumstances beyond her control, or that she has acted responsibly in addressing her 
debts. Further, she has not sought credit counseling, or otherwise brought the problem 
under control as her circumstances permitted.  
 
AG & 20(b) has limited applicability since Applicant has experienced periods of 
unemployment. However, she has had stable employment since June 2007 and even 
the four smallest debts have yet to be paid. Additionally, Applicant failed to show how 
these periods of unemployment impacted her current finances. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant has paid none of the nine debts listed 
in the SOR. The total amount of unpaid debt is approximately $35,000. She was making 
$150 per month on debt not listed in the SOR. In October 2008, she stated she had 
contacted a credit company to establish a plan to address her financial problems. This 
assertion is tempered by her October 2007 statement that she hoped to have a 
repayment plan established by the end of 2007. She has had hopes of addressing her 
debts before, but has not been able to follow thorough with payment. The desire to pay 
one’s debts is important as it arranging a repayment plan to address past due 
obligations. But it is also important that payment actually be made on the debts. 
 
Applicant assumed her father’s $19,742 credit card debt. (SOR ¶ 1.c) She made 
monthly payments on the debt until early 2006. She asserts she has hired an attorney to 
dispute this debt, but provided no documentation or other corroboration. Under AG & 
20(e) “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue” must be provided. Applicant has failed to do this. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
6
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts are not the type that 
indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Also, the money was not spent frivolously, nor incurred on luxuries. 
However, the debts remain unpaid. Applicant asserts she will establish a repayment 
plan, but she made a similar claim in October 2007, and was unable to follow through 
with payment. There is nothing in the record to indicate that this time she will be able to 
follow through and actually make the payments. 
 
Based on the totality of the evidence available in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
She has not taken effective action to resolve her debts, and has not equipped herself to 
avoid financial problems in the future. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended, but should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a 
security clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may 
well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. However, a clearance 
at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
7
 
 
 
8
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
1   1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
