 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08688 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on May 7, 2008. He was interviewed about his financial issues by 
an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on 
June 19, 2008. On October 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
 
2 
 
 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On November 6, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
December 16, 2008. I convened a hearing on January 26, 2009, to consider whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, 
which were marked Exs. 1 through 7 and admitted to the record without objection.  
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced five 
exhibits, which were marked as Exs. A through E and admitted to the record without 
objection. 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
February 5, 2009, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional information 
for the record. Applicant timely filed seven additional exhibits, which I marked as Exs. F 
through L. Department Counsel objected to the admission of Exs. G, H, and I on the 
grounds of relevancy. I sustained the Government’s objections and did not admit those 
exhibits. Applicant’s Exs. F, J, K, and L were admitted to the record without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on February 2, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted five allegations and denied three. Applicant’s admissions are 
included herein as findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and employed by a government contractor. He seeks a 
security clearance. (Ex. 1; Ex. 7; Tr. 19, 25-27.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married for 5 ½ years. They have no children, 
but Applicant recently paid approximately $1,500 in medical bills for the child of his god-
daughter. Applicant’s wife is employed by a federal agency. Applicant’s net monthly 
income is approximately $3,100. His wife’s net monthly income is $3,600.  (Ex. J; Tr. 32, 
53-54, 63-64.) 
 
 In 1993, Applicant received an associate’s degree in business management. In 
1996, he was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in sociology. From 1996 to 1997, 
Applicant attended law school at an institution in the Midwest. At the end of that year, he 
transferred to another law school in the Mid-Atlantic region, where he attended for one 
year. He needs to complete six courses to finish his law degree. He estimates that he 
will need to attend law school for another year or two to receive his degree. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
57-60.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant served in the U.S. military as a reservist from 1988 to 1996. Since 
completing his undergraduate education, he has pursued a number of career paths.  
From September 1999 through June 2005, he was employed as a public school 
teacher.1 From 2003 to 2004, he also had his own business as a home inspector. From 
January 2004 until July 2006, he worked as a real estate salesperson. From 2006 to 
2008, he worked on commission for a business that refinanced home mortgages. 
Because of the decline in the housing industry, he experienced financial hardship and 
underemployment in 2007 as a consequence of his mortgage refinancing job. Applicant 
has worked for his present employer since May 2008. (Ex. 1; Tr. 32-37, 53-55.)  
 
 Applicant admits responsibility for approximately $75,000 in federal education 
debt which is currently in collection or default status. These debts are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. After acquiring these education debts to finance his 
undergraduate education and his law school studies, Applicant made some sporadic 
loan repayments in the late 1990s or early 2000s. The loans were in default when he 
began to teach in 1999. They are currently in default status. The creditor demands an 
$800 monthly payment on the outstanding education debt.  Applicant asserts he cannot 
afford to pay $800 a month and has proposed a $450 monthly payment. Applicant and 
the creditor have not yet agreed upon a payment plan and schedule.  Applicant plans to 
negotiate a plan to repay his delinquent student loans in the future. (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. C; 
Ex. D; Ex. K; Tr. 15-18, 57, 67-68, 71-74.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was responsible for two delinquent debts to a 
communications firm.  One debt was for $205 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and the other was for $403 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.). Applicant denied both debts and stated they had been paid in full in 
2002/2003. He contacted the creditor to request documentation to corroborate his 
statement that the debts had been paid. The creditor responded with a request that 
Applicant pay the debts, and if they had been paid previously, the creditor would issue a 
refund. Applicant stated he had initiated a formal complaint with the creditor and was 
awaiting a reply. Applicant’s credit report of September 15, 2008 shows both accounts 
in collection status. Applicant failed to provide documentation to corroborate payment or 
to corroborate his formal complaint. (Answer to SOR at 1; Ex. 4; Tr. 38.)   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant had failed to satisfy a judgment in the amount $2,984 
which had been levied against Applicant for a debt resulting from the repossession of an 
automobile. (SOR ¶ 1.g.) Applicant denied the debt, stated that it had been satisfied, 
and provided documentation to corroborate satisfaction of the debt. (Ex. E.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant was responsible to a bank for a $1,566 
debt, in collection status, and, as of May 14, 2008, the debt had not been paid. (SOR ¶ 
1.h.)  The debt arose when Applicant overdrew his debit account. He attributed his lack 
of funds to underemployment. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided an offer 
of settlement from the creditor. In a letter to Applicant, dated February 3, 2009, the 
creditor offered to settle the debt for $627.06, provided that Applicant submitted three 
 
1 Applicant’s e-QIP lists his employment as a teacher as four years, from 2000 to 2004.  (Ex. 1 at 14.)  
 
4 
 
 
payments of $209.12 by the 15th day of February, March, and April, 2009. There were 
no documents in the record corroborating that any of these payments had been made 
by the time the record closed.  (Ex. L; Tr. 40-42.) 
 
 In March 2007, Applicant and his wife purchased a home. Their monthly 
mortgage payment is $2,972. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had purchased a 
used automobile in December 2008 and had a monthly car payment of $216. (Tr. 47-
50.)  
 
 Before their marriage in 2003, Applicant and his wife had consumer credit 
counseling as individuals. They subscribe to an on-line credit-monitoring service to help 
them manage their joint finances. They have not had had formal credit counseling as a 
couple. (Tr. 51-53.) 
 
 As a post hearing submission, Applicant provided a copy of his household 
budget. The budget did not list his monthly car payment. Applicant’s budget shows that 
after paying his monthly living expenses and current debts, Applicant has a net monthly 
remainder of over $1,500.  (Ex. J.)   
 
                                                   Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
 
6 
 
 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)). Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)).   
 
Applicant=s student loan delinquencies arose in the 1990s and have remained 
unresolved even though, until recently, he had reliable full-time employment. Appellant’s 
large unresolved student debt raises security concerns which continue to the present 
day, a situation which raises concerns about Applicant’s good judgment.   
 
Applicant, who was employed in mortgage refinancing, experienced financial 
uncertainties in the last year or eighteen months because of the downturn in the 
national housing market. At the same time, he and his wife purchased a home, and their 
monthly mortgage payment equals his net monthly take-home pay. Even so, they have 
organized their financial life to remain solvent. Additionally, Applicant helped a family 
member who needed money to pay for health care for a sick child. 
 
Applicant has made some efforts to work out a payment plan for his student loan 
debt. However, he had not yet made a commitment to begin regular and consistent 
payment. He provided documentation to corroborate his payment of one debt. He failed 
to provide documentation to corroborate his statement that he had contested two debts 
and initiated payment of another. Despite some good faith efforts to pay some of his 
debts, Applicant has not demonstrated a track record of timely payments. It is not clear 
that he will be able to manage his finances and avoid financial delinquency in the   
future. Curiously, he has not set aside money to meet his student loan delinquencies, 
despite his substantial monthly net remainder. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 
20(e) apply in part in mitigation, but that AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began 
more than ten years ago, when he was a mature adult. He did not address $75,000 in 
delinquent student loans even though he was steadily employed. His failure to address 
these substantial delinquencies over a significant period of time raises concerns about 
his judgment and reliability. 
 
To his credit, Applicant has taken recent action to address some of his 
delinquencies. However, these actions are recent and do not demonstrate a track 
record of satisfaction of debt consistently over time.  
 
Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one year after the date that this 
decision becomes final. If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that addresses the 
Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.f.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
