1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04507
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on May 2, 2007.
On July 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline G for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 28, 2008 and answered it on
the same day. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on December 5, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January
13, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 4, 2009. The
government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A at the
2
hearing, which was admitted without objection. I left the record open for Applicant to
submit additional documentation. He timely submitted a packet which was marked AE
B, and admitted into the record without exception. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on February 12, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 28, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a- 1.b of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the allegation in ¶
1.c. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a
security clearance. 
Applicant is 37-years-old. He graduated from high school in 1991. He has two
Associate Degrees and he is attending college at the present time. He is married with
two children. Applicant served on active duty in the United States Army (USA) from
1996 until 1998 (GE 1). He has been with his current employer for almost three years
(Tr. 16). He has held a security clearance since 1996.
In July 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the
Influence (DUI) and DUI with a BAC of .08 or more. He had attended a practice re-
enactment. He and his friends went to a club after the practice. He consumed
approximately four beers (Tr. 28). He was found guilty and sentenced to one day in jail
for each charge, given a fine of $475, and 12 months unsupervised probation for each
charge. He was required to complete a 16 hour DUI Level II (lowest level) treatment
course. He lost his driving privilege for 30 days with an additional 60 days of restricted
driving.
At the time, Applicant was single. He would drink on the weekends (two to four
beers) at a party or other social occasion. He sometimes went to a bar or clubs. His job
required him to get up very early and thus he did not drink during the week (Tr. 27).
Applicant has not had any other alcohol incidents since the 2003 DUI. 
Applicant completed his 16 hour alcohol counseling program in October 2003. He
was in a group counseling setting of approximately 12 people (AE A). He also attended
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for a period of time. He denies that he was given a poor
prognosis. He also denies that he reported drinking 24 beers in one sitting. He did not
even see an evaluation report that was presented to the Court after the counseling
program. He never received a diagnosis from the counselor. Applicant received no
discharge papers. The only paper he received was the Certificate of Completion.
Applicant was credible in his testimony that he was not told to abstain from alcohol
during his attendance in the Level II program.
Applicant completed his May 2008 interrogatories. He reported that he currently
drinks alcohol (wine and beer). He drinks beer on the weekends and he will drink a
glass or two of wine two days during the week. He reports that he was intoxicated four
3
or five times within the last year (GE 2). He never drinks alcohol prior to work or at work.
He has never had any incidents with drinking alcohol at work. 
Applicant reports he has no craving for alcohol. He made a personal decision to
stop drinking before he received the revocation notice. He and his wife stay home with
their young child. His wife drinks on occasion. 
When Applicant decided to stop drinking (July 2008), he went to a counselor. He
also checked in with his AA sponsor. He is now attending sessions and meetings for
support (Tr. 44). He and his sponsor discuss many aspect of life not just alcohol-related
issues. He finds that he gets good advice on life in general (Tr. 44). 
At the hearing, Applicant emphasized that his circumstances have changed since
2003. He is now married and has children. He is serious about his career. He
purchased a house and wants to provide for his family. He acknowledges that he made
a mistake and it was poor judgment on his part.
Applicant’s supervisor, team leader and senior analyst all praise him for his
outstanding organization and his ability to successfully multi-task under pressure. He is
highly respected by his co-workers. He is being recommended for a higher position of
responsibility (AE A).
Applicant’s senior systems analyst describes him as “the fabric that holds his
work team together.” He trains new employees and demonstrates loyalty to the group.
He is punctual and ensures that tasks are completed on time. He poses no threat or risk
in his work. He is highly recommended (AE A).
Applicant continues to complete specialized training courses to achieve
certifications in the area of information technology. He maintains a high level of
technical knowledge. He displays a good work ethic. His attitude is positive. He has
shown the highest level of integrity, intelligence, dedication and strength of character in
carrying out his duties at work (AE A).
Applicant’s friends and neighbors describe him as a stable family man and a
good father. He is a thoughtful person. He takes pride in his children and is active in
their lives. He is well liked in the neighborhood.
Applicant has an excellent work history. His appraisals indicate that he “far
exceeds” or “exceeds most” in all skill areas. He works with minimal supervision.
Applicant’s assignments demonstrate his quality, effectiveness, and thoroughness. He
is a mature, quiet individual who maintains the highest professional/ethical standards.
He supports his team and fosters an environment of trust and respect (AE B).
4
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2©,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
5
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and “(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.”
In this case, Applicant has one arrest for a DUI in July 2003. He continued to
drink after 2003 and at some times to intoxication. Thus, AG ¶¶ 22 (a) and 22(c) apply.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(C) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
6
Applicant had one DUI in 2003. This is his only alcohol-related incident. Applicant
completed the 16 hour alcohol education program. He was not diagnosed as an alcohol
dependent or as an abuser. He never received an evaluation and was credible in that
he was not told to abstain from alcohol. Nevertheless, he attends AA and has a
sponsor. He stopped drinking in or about July 2008. He is now married with children and
his lifestyle has changed. Applicant has an exemplary work record. He is lauded for his
fine work. Applicant does not want alcohol to ruin his life. He values his work and his
family. He does not frequent bars. He acknowledged that alcohol created a problem in
his life and he does not want that to occur again. His drinking, before he stopped,
almost a year ago, was moderate.  Applicant has mitigated the alcohol consumption
concerns under AG ¶¶ 23(a), (b), and (c).
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the USA and
held a secret clearance. He has no incidents or issues with protecting information.
Applicant had one DUI incident five years ago. He completed his court ordered
probation and the 16 hour counseling program. He continued to drink in moderation until
July 2008. He is now married and providing for his family. He attends AA and receives
support from his AA sponsor. He has an exemplary work record from his current
employer and is highly recommended by his supervisor and team leader. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under alcohol
consumption.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
