 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05073 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on July 13, 2007. On October 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 6, 2008. The case was assigned to me on November 17, 2008. On 
December 3, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for 
December 19, 2008. The hearing was held, as scheduled. During the hearing, it was 
discovered Applicant did not receive the Notice of Hearing 15 days prior to the Notice of 
Hearing as required by the Directive. Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. 
 
2 
 
 
(Tr at 12) The Government offered six exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1-6 without objection. The Applicant offered three exhibits which were 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - C. Applicant testified and called one witness. 
The transcript was received on December 29, 2008. The record was held open until 
January 15, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely 
submitted a seven-page document which was admitted as AE D. The record closed on 
January 15, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for his current employer since June  
2006. He has held a security clearance for over 25 years with no security violations. 
From August 22, 1980, to May 31, 1988, he served on active duty in the United States 
Army. He separated at the grade of Captain and received an honorable discharge. He  
worked for numerous defense contractors since separating from active duty. The 
highest level of education he has achieved is a Masters of Science in Systems 
Management. He is single and has no children. (Tr at 4-7, 32-33, 68; Gov 1; AE B)   
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was a college student in 1977. He 
drank on average two to three times a month. He drank approximately two to three 
beers on each occasion. After his graduation from college, Applicant entered the 
military. His alcohol use was relatively light when he was on active duty. He drank on 
average two to three beers in one sitting, or two to three mixed drinks in one sitting 
three to five times a year. (Gov 2 at 1) 
 
Applicant increased his alcohol use after his father died in 1992. He consumed 
three drinks in one sitting, three to five times a month.  Applicant began to drink heavily 
after his mother died in March 1999. He started drinking a six pack of beer a week. His 
alcohol use elevated to 24 beers a week. He drank alone on weekends and in the 
evenings after work. In March 2000, Applicant progressed to 1.5 liters of rum and 24 
beers a week. He drank alcohol seven days and week and drank to intoxication four 
days a week. (Tr at 46 - 47; Gov 2 at 1) 
 
In November 2001, Applicant attempted to quit drinking alcohol. He did not 
consume alcohol for three days. He started to hallucinate and heard voices. On 
November 29, 2001, Applicant went to a local hospital emergency room. He was treated 
for acute alcohol withdrawal. He told the emergency room personnel that he had been 
drinking a case of beer a night for the past two years. He suffered hallucinations and 
delirium tremens when he was going through alcohol withdrawal. He was prescribed a 
drug to help him with the withdrawal symptoms. He was also advised of various 
treatment options related to his alcoholism. His family physician diagnosed him with 
 
3 
 
 
alcohol withdrawal syndrome and alcohol dependency. (Tr at 47-48, 51-53; Gov 2 at 2; 
Gov 4; Gov 5) 
 
From January 7, 2002, to April 8, 2002, Applicant attended outpatient alcohol 
counseling at a local clinic. His counselor, a licensed clinical social worker, diagnosed 
him as alcohol dependent. His discharge prognosis was good provided he followed the 
recommendations of his continued care therapist. (Gov 2 at 2-3; Gov 6) In addition to 
his outpatient counseling, Applicant attended one Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meeting 
per week. He attended weekly AA meetings until July 2002. He stopped attending AA 
because he felt he “was back in control of my life and could handle alcohol use on my 
own.”  He never had a sponsor in AA. He admitted during the hearing that he was 
advised by his alcohol counselors that he should not drink alcohol at all. (Tr at 48-54; 
Gov 2 at 3)  
 
In 2005, Applicant started to drink alcohol again. He described his alcohol usage 
as light to moderate. He drank one to three glasses of wine with dinner about once a 
month. In the hot weather, he would drink one to three beers on average two to four 
times a week. In cooler weather, he drank two beers, two to three times a week. He did 
not drink hard liquor and did not let his alcohol use affect his life. (Tr at 54, 57; Gov 2 at 
3; Gov 3 at 12)  
 
In answers to interrogatories, dated August 21, 2008, Applicant indicated that the 
last time he drank alcohol was about 8-12 months ago. He drank a 12-pack of beer. He 
stated he no longer drinks alcohol because he is older and concerned about his health. 
(Gov 3 at 3-4) He was placed on blood pressure medication. He was advised not to 
drink alcohol while taking this medication. Applicant’s last use of alcohol was in 
approximately April 2008. (Tr at 55-60)    
 
In conjunction with his security clearance background investigation, Applicant 
was assessed by a licensed clinical social worker (hereinafter referred to as counselor) 
about the status of his alcohol use on September 16, 2008.  During the assessment, 
Applicant stated that his last use of alcohol was six months ago.  Based on the 
information provided by Applicant, the counselor concluded that he did not meet the 
criteria for substance abuse treatment. The counselor’s diagnosis was that Applicant 
was alcohol dependent with physiological dependence sustained full remission. 
Applicant was advised that he could benefit from active participation in an Alcoholics 
Anonymous support group in order to assist him in maintaining his sobriety. (Gov 3 at 8-
17) He does not currently attend AA. He is trying to find a group that he feels 
comfortable with. (Tr at 58)    
 
The Facility Security Officer at the company where Applicant worked when he 
underwent treatment for alcoholism testified during the hearing. She worked with 
Applicant for approximately five years. During the time Applicant worked for the 
company he never exercised questionable judgment. She never considered him 
unreliable or untrustworthy.  Applicant was dedicated to his position and had a good 
reputation with his manager, subordinates, and peers. Applicant was never involved in 
 
4 
 
 
any security violations during the period she worked with him. (Tr at 25-32)  In a signed 
letter submitted after the hearing, she stated that Applicant does present a security risk 
to the US government. She is aware of his problems with alcohol but believes he has 
conquered that problem. She has never seen him intoxicated. She recommends him for 
a security clearance. (AE D at 5)   
 
A senior engineer who recently worked closely with Applicant on a project, 
describes him as “professional,” “proactive, mission-oriented, and knowledgeable.” (AE 
D at 3) Applicant’s former department manager has known Applicant for 12 years. He 
has worked with him for eight years. He states Applicant has always shown a high 
degree of integrity and responsibility. Applicant is always timely and responsible to his 
customer’s needs. The department manager states Applicant’s good judgment and 
mature outlook ensured a logical and practical approach to his endeavors and he would 
be an asset to any organization. (AE D at 4)  
 
A senior logistics analyst has worked with Applicant for the past two years. They 
have successfully worked together on many challenging and complicated issues and 
projects.  Applicant has a natural acumen for team building. He highly recommends 
Applicant because he has the personal and technical wherewithal to plan, organize, 
direct, control, and complete all actions required to master any project. (AE D at 6-7)   
 
During his active duty service, Applicant was awarded the Army Commendation 
Medal with One Oak Leaf Cluster, the Overseas Service Ribbon and the Army Service 
Ribbon. (AE B) He was received numerous certificates of appreciation and 
commendations during his years working as a defense contractor. (AE C)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) &22(c) (habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
person is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) applies. When he was 
drinking heavily, Applicant drank approximately a case of beer each evening. He also 
drank approximately 1.5 liters of hard liquor (rum) each week. His alcohol use was 
excessive and impaired his judgment.   
 
 
6 
 
 
AC DC &22(d) (diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence) 
applies. Applicant’s family physician diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent when 
he sought treatment in November 2001.  
  
AC DC &22(e) (evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program) 
applies. After Applicant was treated for acute alcohol withdrawal, he attended outpatient 
treatment at a center involved in alcohol counseling. The counselor, a license clinical 
social worker, diagnosed him as alcohol dependent.  
 
AC DC &22(f) (relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence 
and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program) applies. Applicant completed 
outpatient alcohol treatment on April 8, 2002. He remained sober for approximately two 
years but started drinking alcohol again because he thought he could handle it.  
Although, Applicant describes his alcohol use as light to moderate, it raises a security 
concern because Applicant decided to begin drinking alcohol after completion of his 
treatment program and after being advised to abstain from alcohol.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) ¶ 23(a) (so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. While serious concerns 
are raised pertaining to Applicant’s decision to start drinking alcohol again, he stopped 
drinking alcohol in April 2008.  He fully disclosed his alcohol use during his September 
2008 alcohol assessment and still received a favorable prognosis despite this 
disclosure. His co-workers think highly of him. He has no alcohol-related issues at work 
or outside of work. There are no recent issues pertaining to his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.    
 
 AC MC & 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser) applies.  Applicant acknowledges that he is an alcoholic.  He took steps 
to deal with his alcoholism in 2001. He was sober for several years after completing 
treatment. Although, he started to drink alcohol in 2005 because he thought he could 
handle it, he stopped drinking alcohol in April 2008 due to health issues. He is 
prescribed medication that cannot be mixed with alcohol. He does not intend to drink 
alcohol in the future.       
 
FC MC &23(d) (the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
 
7 
 
 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a 
similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program) partially applies.  Although Applicant began to drink alcohol 
again several years after he completed treatment for alcohol dependence and against 
the advice of his counselors, he stopped drinking in April 2008.  He fully disclosed that 
he had resumed drinking alcohol during his alcohol assessment in September 2008. 
Despite his disclosure, the counselor gave Applicant a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence, in sustained full remission. I consider this to be a favorable prognosis.  
However, Applicant does not attend AA meetings. The counselor who did the 
assessment recommended that he continue to attend AA meetings in order to assist 
him with maintaining his sobriety.  Even though Applicant appeared to be serious about 
remaining abstinent at the hearing, FC MC ¶ 23(d) is given less weight because 
Applicant does not attend AA meetings.  
 
Security concerns were raised under alcohol consumption, Applicant met his 
burden to mitigate the concerns raised because he has not drank alcohol in over eight 
months, he received a favorable prognosis in a September 2008 alcohol assessment, 
and there is no evidence of any alcohol-related incidents involving Applicant. Guideline 
G is found for Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past 
struggles with alcohol. I considered that he voluntarily sought treatment in November 
2001. I considered that he has had no alcohol-related arrests or incidents at work. He 
stopped drinking alcohol in April 2008. He has been sober for over 8 months. He is on 
prescription medication that is not compatible with alcohol use. He does not intend to 
drink alcohol in the future. His September 2008 alcohol assessment was favorable. The 
favorable comments of Applicant’s superiors and co-workers weigh heavily in his favor. 
While it is recommended that Applicant resume attendance at AA meetings, there is 
 
8 
 
 
substantial evidence to conclude that his alcohol problem is currently under control. He 
is aware that future alcohol use could jeopardize his ability to maintain a security 
clearance. While Applicant’s decision to resume alcohol use after completion of 
outpatient treatment raised security issues under alcohol consumption, he has mitigated 
the concerns based on his honesty about his alcoholism, his favorable alcohol 
assessment in September 2008, his past eight months of sobriety, and the favorable 
recommendations of his current and former coworkers. Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, is found for Applicant.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
