 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05848 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On October 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated written response, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on December 30, 2008. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 5, 2009. He responded 
with an undated letter and six documents. Department Counsel did not object to his 
response. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a Bachelor 
of Science degree. He is married. He stated in October 2008 that his wife was pregnant 
and expected to give birth in about four months.1  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $11,493. The SOR also alleges 
that Applicant’s personal financial statement reflects a negative net monthly remainder 
of $362. Applicant admitted all the allegations, with the exception of the $685 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, which he stated was paid. He also provided additional information 
to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant attended college between 2001 and 2006. He worked while attending 
school, but his income was barely enough to meet his living expenses. His current 
financial situation remains problematic. He provided financial data to an investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in October 2007. After accounting for 
his income, expenses, and debts, he had $362 more going out in debts and expenses 
than he had income. His father periodically assisted him financially with the shortfalls.2 
Applicant’s negative cash flow is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant responded to DOHA 
interrogatories in October 2008. He stated: 
 
I would like to state that I am incapable [of making] payment plans for the 
debts mentioned in the report. My responsibilities have greatly increased 
since the date of the interview. I became married and my wife and I are 
currently expecting a child in about four months. Since she’s unemployed 
[and] uninsured, I am therefore responsible for all maternity expenses and 
all associated expenses thereafter.3 
 
 In addition to his delinquent debts and other expenses, Applicant’s credit reports 
also show at least $60,000 in student loans. The student loans are not listed as 
delinquent. He pays $74 per month on one loan with a balance of about $21,000. The 
remaining student loans are in deferment, but they will need to be addressed eventually. 
He has not received financial counseling.4  
 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 7. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Item 7. 
 
4 Items 6-9. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted sufficient documentation to establish that the $685 debt, 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, was actually a $259 debt. This debt was paid in July 2008.5 
 
 Applicant admitted owing a delinquent debt of $434 to a medical provider, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He sustained injuries requiring medical treatment when his car 
was struck by another vehicle. He sued the other party and was awarded a judgment. 
The other party did not have insurance, and Applicant has apparently not been able to 
collect on the judgment. He told the OPM investigator in October 2007 that he would 
call the collection company within a month to establish a payment plan. The debt 
remains unpaid.6 
 
 Applicant co-signed a car loan with his girlfriend in about 2003. She did not earn 
enough money to make the payments, and he was unable to pick up the payments after 
she stopped paying on the loan. The car was repossessed in about 2004. Applicant 
admits he owes the deficiency balance of $8,542, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.7  
 
 Applicant was the victim of a con artist in 2006. He subscribed to an internet web 
site to find a roommate. He received an e-mail from a woman in Africa stating that she 
would like to be his roommate. She sent him two checks for $800. She asked him for 
$800 back, so that she could move her belongings to the United States. He cashed the 
checks at his bank and sent her $800. The bank notified him that the checks were not 
valid. The bank attempted to debit the $1,600 from his account, but he had a negative 
balance. The bank asked Applicant to repay the money. He told the bank that he was 
the victim of fraud, but the bank still wanted the money. Applicant told the OPM 
investigator in October 2007 that the balance due on the account was $1,832. He stated 
that he would contact the collection company handling the debt within six months to 
establish a monthly payment schedule. He has made no payments on this debt, which 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
5 Items 4, 8; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
6 Items 4-9. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Items 4-7. 
 
 
4 
 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline lists several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. He continues to have a negative monthly cash 
flow. The evidence is sufficient to raise all of the above potentially disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(d) are potentially applicable in this 
case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on most of the debts alleged in the SOR. His 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributes his debts to being a student and not earning enough money. 
He also had an explanation for each debt. The medical debt resulted from a car 
accident that was not his fault. The car was repossessed because his girlfriend did not 
pay the monthly payments. However, he co-signed for the car loan, which meant that he 
guaranteed the loan. He stated that he was the victim of an internet scam. He received 
 
6 
 
$1,600 from the bank. If he had properly analyzed the situation, he would have realized 
that it did not make sense to turn around and send the woman $800. Even accepting 
Applicant’s explanation for this debt, he made $800 on the deal. The bank gave him 
$1,600, and he only paid the woman $800. He should have, at a minimum, paid the 
bank back the $800. He did not. I find that the conditions that resulted in his financial 
problems were only partly beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Other than $259 
for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant has made no payments on any of his debts. 
He did not act responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.   
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He has delinquent debts and has 
a negative cash flow each month. There are no clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. One payment of $259 
does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
     
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has more than $10,000 in 
delinquent debt. He has more expenses than he has monthly income. With the large 
amount of student loans looming, there is little chance that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved in the foreseeable future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
