                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-00155 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 3, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86). 
On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C and B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 28, 2008. He answered 
the SOR in writing on September 25, 2008, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on September 29, 2008. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 6, 2008, and I received the case 
assignment on November 19, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 2, 
2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 17, 2008. The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E and G, without objection.  
Department Counsel objected to Applicant’s Exhibit F, and I upheld the objection.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 2, 2009. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Jordan. (Tr. 219 to 221) The request and the attached 
documents were admitted into evidence and were included in the record as Exhibit 5. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 25, 2008, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a and 2.b, and 2.d, 2.e, and 2.f of the SOR, with 
explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c and 2.c of the SOR. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old, married for 33 years, and has three adult children who 
were born in the United States.  He works for a defense contractor.  He retired from the 
U.S. Army civilian employee force in 2004.  He started working for the Army in 1975.  
Applicant came to the United States with his parents and siblings in 1967 at the age of 
19.  He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 1974, having been born in 
Jordan.  He has lived in the same house since 1975. (Tr. 104, 115-123, 143, 154, 196; 
Exhibits 1, B, D, G) 
 
 Applicant obtained his bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering in 1973, and a 
master’s degree in professional management in 1975.  He has always been employed 
by the U.S. Government until his retirement.  During that time period he held a security 
clearance until his retirement. (Tr. 119-122) 
 
 Since he arrived in the United States in 1967 using his Jordanian passport, 
Applicant has maintained and used the Jordanian passport to travel to his birth place in 
Jordan.  He kept the Jordanian passport after he obtained a U.S. passport when he 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen.  He maintains dual citizenship with Jordan.  His 
answer in the 2001 security clearance application (SCA) at Question 14 states he does 
not possess a passport from another country other than the United States, when in fact 
Applicant had the Jordanian passport.  He renewed his Jordanian passport in 2007, and 
it is valid until 2012.  He disclosed the Jordanian passport on his 2007 SCA.  None of 
 
3 
 
 
his supervisors between 1975 and 2004 knew he had a Jordanian passport in addition 
to his U.S. passport. (Tr. 133-136, 203-208) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Jordan and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1982.  She maintains dual citizenship with Jordan  Applicant and his wife married in 
1976 after meeting in 1975 in Jordan on a trip he took to Jordan to see his family.  He 
traveled to Jordan in 1976 to get married.  His wife has 13 siblings who live in Jordan.  
Both of her parents are deceased.  Applicant’s wife visits with her siblings when she 
travels to Jordan.  His wife has a Jordanian passport and a U.S. passport. She uses the 
Jordanian passport to enter Jordan, and shows the U.S. passport at the same time to 
the border officials in Jordan.  Applicant follows the same practice on his trips to Jordan. 
(Tr. 127, 141-156; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has six sisters. Two sisters live in the United States.  Three sisters live 
in Jordan.  One of those sisters is married to a retired Jordanian Army colonel or 
general.  Applicant is not certain about his retired brother-in-law’s military rank.  The 
daughter of another sister living in Jordan is the secretary for a Jordanian Army general.  
She is eligible to retire from that job. The sixth and youngest sister lives in Dubai with 
her husband who is a civil engineer.  Applicant speaks with his sisters often.  He spoke 
with his oldest sister in Jordan the weekend before the hearing.  Applicant also had a 
brother-in-law who was an advisor to the late King Hussein of Jordan.  This relative died 
in the 1920s.  Applicant has 2500-3000 extended family relatives in Jordan. (Tr. 163-
187; Exhibits 1-4, B and G) 
 
 Applicant has two brothers living in the United States.  They are naturalized U.S. 
citizens, and maintain dual Jordanian-U.S. citizenship.  Applicant disclosed these 
brothers and his two sisters living in the United States on his 2007 SCA, but did not 
disclose his other siblings, claiming that the question only inquired about those relatives 
who had U.S. citizenship and lived in the United States.  Applicant’s mother, who died in 
2007, also had dual Jordanian and U.S. citizenship.  His late father also had dual 
citizenship. (Tr. 131, 158-160, 168, 169, 198; Exhibits 1-4, B and G) 
 
 Applicant owns his home estimated to be worth about $150,000.  He has about 
$60,000 in savings in the United States, and about $80,000 in his Thrift Savings Plan.  
He inherited land from his father in Jordan, valued at about $20,000.  He inherited from 
his mother a commercial building, in joint tenancy with his brothers, in Jordan, and his 
share is worth about $40,000 he estimates. Applicant keeps his Jordanian passport 
because he needs it to protect his inheritance, and to be able to buy and sell property in 
Jordan, or so he understands Jordanian law to be.  About a month before his hearing, 
he asked his ill sister in Jordan to try to sell his interest in the commercial building for 
him.  Neither of his two brothers is interested in buying his share of the building. (Tr. 
156, 157, 189-202; Exhibits 1-4, B and G) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Jordan in 1975, 1976 to get married, in 1993, 1995, 1998, 
and 1999 when his father died.  These trips were made for the purpose of Applicant 
visiting his family members. (Tr. 123, 137, 138, 144; Exhibits 1-4, B and G) 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 Six of Applicant’s supervisors and co-workers testified for him at the hearing.  
Ten other persons submitted character statements.  The persons who testified worked 
with Applicant for four to 20 years, and opined Applicant’s work ethic is very high, and 
that he is honest and trustworthy.  They recommend Applicant receive a security 
clearance. Applicant also submitted several certificates of appreciation and performance 
rewards. (Tr. 50-112; Exhibits C and D) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts pertaining to Jordan.  The 
country of Jordan’s government is a constitutional monarchy in the Middle East.  The 
government has a Council of Ministers appointed by the King of Jordan.  The bicameral 
legislature is partially elected, with an appointed Senate and elected Assembly.  Jordan 
is pro-Western in its foreign policies, and has had close relations with the United States 
for 60 years.  It has been an independent country since May 1946.  Jordan fights 
terrorism, but has some human rights issues which include torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, and restrictions of freedoms of press, 
speech, assembly, and movement.  The threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. 
Terrorist groups conduct intelligence gathering operations in Jordan, to undermine U.S. 
interests.  Jordanian law also allows any male Jordanian relative to prevent a woman or 
child from leaving Jordan, even if they are U.S. citizens. Jordan also regards dual 
Jordanian-U.S. citizens as Jordanian citizens. (Exhibit 5, parts I to VI) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises:  
 
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
 (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
 (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by 
an American citizen; 
 
 (c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, 
so as to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and, 
 
 (d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other 
than the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce 
United States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Of these four security concerns, the facts of Applicant’s case show ¶ 10 (a) (1) 
(possession of a foreign passport) and (a) (5) (using foreign citizenship to protect 
financial or business interests in another country, i.e., Jordan) apply.  Applicant has held 
a Jordanian passport, unbeknownst to his supervisors over the past 30 years, since he 
came to the United States.  He did not disclose the existence of that passport in 2001 
when his security clearance was renewed, having answered Question 14 on his SCA 
that year with a negative answer.  Applicant does not want to surrender his Jordanian 
passport because he believes it protects his right to hold real estate in Jordan, including 
the $60,000 worth of land and commercial building he owns there.  He admits he uses 
his Jordanian passport as the primary document to travel to Jordan, showing the border 
officials his U.S. passport as an adjunct document only during travel to Jordan. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising under 
this guideline: 
 
 (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in 
a foreign country; 
 
 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
 
7 
 
 
 (c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor; 
 
 (d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
 (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
 
 (f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United 
States Government. 
  
 Of these mitigating conditions, only ¶ 11 (a) (dual citizenship based solely on his 
parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country) has potential applicability. However, 
because he continues to possess and use his Jordanian passport, it is not applicable.  
This condition has only limited applicability.  None of the other mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
 (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion; 
 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or 
country by providing that information; 
 
8 
 
 
 
 (c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that the 
individual's access to protected information may involve unacceptable risk to national 
security; 
 
 (d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; 
 
 (e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
 (f) failure to report, when required, association with a foreign national; 
 
 (g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, or 
employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
 (h) indications that representatives or nationals from a foreign country are acting 
to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and, 
 
 (i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the 
individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign person, group, 
government, or country. 
 
 Applicant has contacts with his siblings living in Jordan.  He admits he has a 
large family network in Jordan, consisting of 2,500 to 3,000 relatives.  His wife, a dual 
citizen of Jordan and the U.S., also has a large family in Jordan.   Applicant is trying to 
get his sister in Jordan to sell his share of the real estate there which he owns. 
Therefore, ¶ 7 (a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion) applies.  Applicant could be subject to pressure or coercion, 
manipulation or inducement to his attempts to sell his property and liquidate his $60,000 
interest in the real estate.  He also has relatives whose spouses had high level positions 
in the Jordanian government and military forces, or whose family members work for 
those governmental units.  
 
 Applicant lives with his wife, a dual citizen of Jordan and the United States. 
Therefore, he is sharing living quarters with a person, which creates a heighted risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion because of his wife’s familial 
connections in Jordan. ¶ 7 (d) applies.  
 
 Finally, and most importantly, Applicant has substantial business, financial, or 
property interests in Jordan, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
 
9 
 
 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
Applicant has $60,000 worth of ownership interest in real estate and rental property in 
Jordan.  His U.S. savings account has the same amount, so this real estate value is 
considerable when compared to his U.S. financial holdings.  In an area in which 
terrorists are active who do not like the United States or its policies, Applicant, as a dual 
citizen, could have his property subject to a great risk of influence or exploitation.  In his 
efforts to protect or sell the property, he might be induced to make decisions contrary to 
best interests of the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.; 
 
 (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; 
 
 (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
 (d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are 
approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
 (e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or 
organizations from a foreign country; and, 
 
 (f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests are such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 Of these mitigating conditions, only ¶ 8 (b) might have some limited applicability 
because of Applicant’s long-standing connections to the United States, his 29-year work 
history for the U.S. Army, his ownership of a home and savings accounts in the United 
States, and his long history of quality work at his job until his retirement in 2004 as 
attested to by his co-workers.  But, those facts are counterbalanced by Applicant’s 
possession and use of a Jordanian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in 1974, his 
failure to disclose the possession of that passport all the years he worked for the U.S. 
government to his supervisors, and especially in 2001 on his SCA, along with his 
adamant refusal to surrender that passport until he decides he does not need it 
 
10 
 
 
anymore to protect his financial interests in Jordan.  He is acting in his own personal 
interests by making that decision.   
 
 It should also be noted that Applicant did not disclose his foreign-residing siblings 
on the 2007 SCA.  On the 2001 SCA he does not disclose his Jordanian passport, and 
on the latest SCA he does not disclose relatives living in Jordan.  There is a pattern of 
non-disclosure exhibited by Applicant which causes a heightened security concern.  
Lastly, none of the remaining mitigating security conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Possessing a foreign passport 
without disclosing its existence for 30 years by a Government employee involved in the 
work Applicant performed, for which he was paid a salary and now receives a pension, 
while possessing a security clearance, is very serious conduct of long duration.  
Applicant knew what he was doing, yet did it to protect whatever interests he might have 
in Jordan for his own financial and personal interests.  During all this time Applicant was 
a highly-educated scientist and Government employee.  He refuses to surrender the 
passport, showing there is no behavioral change or attempts to mitigate his conduct.  
There is a great likelihood for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress as Applicant 
seeks to sell his interests in the real estate he owns in Jordan, with all its troubles in the 
present economic situation, if in fact he is trying to sell it.  Asking a sick sister a month 
before the hearing is not a diligent or sincere effort to sell real estate.  His security 
concern will continue until Applicant decides he no longer needs the passport, but 
based on his long-term retention of the Jordanian passport, it is highly unlikely he will 
ever surrender this passport.  
  
 
11 
 
 
I considered his work history and the recommendations of his co-workers and 
supervisors.  His good work performance over the years is insufficient to overcome 
Applicant’s insistence on retaining his foreign passport even if granted a security 
clearance.  Nor is it sufficient to overcome Applicant’s extensive network of family 
relations in Jordan, including the several relatives who served in high military positions, 
and some of whom continue to work for the Jordanian government. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his foreign 
preference and foreign influence security considerations.  I also conclude the “whole 
person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
