 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-05817 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Canfield, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On October 23, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 22, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 27, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On December 4, 2008, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. A Notice of Hearing was issued December 16, 2008, and the case was 
 
 
 
 
2
heard on January 13, 2009, as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through E into evidence without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the 
record open until January 23, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted four exhibits that were marked AE F through I 
and admitted into the record without objection by the Government. On January 26, 
2009, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.j, but denied that they were not being addressed.  
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and unmarried. After graduating from high school in 
June 2000, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He served the next five and a half years on a 
naval ship, as an information system specialist. He was deployed to the Persian Gulf 
three times, for eight month stints. He received enlisted evaluations that recommended 
he be promoted early throughout his naval career and held a secret and interim Top 
Secret clearance. At one point, he had 17 people working for him. In March 2006, he 
received an Other than Honorable Discharge for using marijuana in January 2006. He 
was an E-5 at the time, earning about $42,000 annually.1 (GE 1 at 29; Tr. 36) 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began occurring after he left the Navy. Upon his 
discharge, he was required to repay a $16,000 bonus he had received from the 
Department of Defense (DoD) for reenlisting, which monies he did not have. From 
March 2006 until November 2007, he worked about eight months, on and off, and was 
unemployed the rest of the time, until he obtained his current position. He went from 
$42,000 per year to no income for almost two years. (Tr. 98) Although he managed to 
stay current with all of his financial obligations while in the Navy, he could no longer pay 
his debts, which included two automobile loans and three credit cards. As the debts 
started accruing large interest costs, his total indebtedness began to rise. (Tr. 82-84) At 
a certain point, he decided to move in with his parents to avoid filing bankruptcy. (Tr. 61)  
 
 In November 2007, Applicant started working for a federal contractor, having 
completed an e-QIP in October 2007. In that e-QIP, he disclosed the debts he knew had 
become delinquent. During a subsequent interview with a governmental investigator, he 
was informed of others. (Tr. 43) He then obtained a credit bureau report (CBR) for the 
first time, and learned of the magnitude of his debts. (Tr. 103) In December 2007, he 
contacted a debt consolidation company. On December 15, 2007, he made an initial 
$750 payment on a plan to resolve 11 debts, totaling $28,601. (AE B at 2-3) Under the 
terms of the agreement, he will continue to pay $600 per month into a trust account 
toward the balance of the accounts while the company pays off the debts after it 
renegotiates the accounts. To-date, he has paid $8,700 to the company, which settled a 
$5,447 debt for $3,264 owed to a creditor, not listed on the SOR. He has accrued 
                                            
1The Government did not raise any security concerns under Drug Abuse or Criminal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
3
$1,838 in the trust account that will be used to resolve and pay additional accounts. 
According to the plan, all of his debts will be resolved by July 2010. He will have paid 
about $20,000 to resolve approximately $28,601 of delinquent debt.2 (AE B)    
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant has 10 delinquent debts, totaling $20,497, all of 
which are included in the repayment plan he established in December 2007.3 The status 
of the 10 delinquent debts is as follows: 
 
1. The debt in SOR ¶ 1. a $1,984 debt is owed to a credit card company. It is 
included in the repayment plan and is listed as No. 10. (AE B at 2; Tr. 53).   
 
2. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b for $1,999 debt is owed on a defaulted car loan. It is 
included as Nos. 8 and 9 on the repayment plan. (AE B at 2; Tr. 56) 
 
3. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c for $1,381 debt is included as No. 9 on the repayment 
plan. (AE B at 2) 
 
4. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $33 is included in the repayment plan and is listed 
as No. 7. (AE B at 2; Tr. 57) 
 
5. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e for $210 debt was paid in full on July 17, 2008, for 
$223. (AE E: 6/26/07-7/25/08 Bank Statement; Tr. 58) 
 
6. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f for $1,690 debt owed to a credit card company for a 
laptop computer is included in the repayment plan as No. 1. (AE B at 2; Tr. 
58)  
 
7.  The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g for $3,220 is owed to a credit card company and  is 
included in the repayment plan as No. 6. (AE B at 2; Tr. 58) 
 
8.  The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h for $4,559 is included in the repayment plan as No. 2. 
(AE B at 2; Tr. 59)  
 
9. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i for $3,368 is owed on an automobile loan is included in 
the repayment plan as No. 11.  (AE B at 2; Tr. 59)  
 
10.  The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j for $2,053 is  included in the repayment plan as No. 5. 
(AE B at 2; Tr. 59)  
 
 In addition to resolving the above 10 debts, Applicant repaid $3,200 of the 
$16,000 debt owed to DoD with the help of a $4,800 loan from his parents. (Tr. 52) As 
                                            
2 This amount is the total of the payments Applicant has made and will make as listed on the 
repayment plan under the Transaction columns.(AE B) It appears that a large portion of Applicant’s 
payments are going to the company as settlement fees. (AE D)  
3The plan includes 11 delinquent debts, one of which is not listed in the SOR, but is listed as No. 
4 in the repayment plan. 
 
 
 
 
4
of the hearing date, he reduced that balance to $10,500 and $1,011 to his parents.4 He 
submitted a revised budget that lists his net monthly income as $2,883. His monthly 
living expenses are $1,238. He spends $1,100 a month on his debt reduction plan, 
which consists of $600 to the debt consolidation company, $400 to DoD, and $100 to 
his parents, for a total of $1,100. He has a net remainder of $545. (AE C at 2) He is also 
putting 6% of his paycheck in a 401(k). (Tr. 66) He has recently paid a $544 delinquent 
debt that was not listed on the SOR, but does appear on the October 2008 credit 
bureau report. (Tr. 73) He no longer uses credit cards. (Tr. 100) 
  
 Applicant provided a copy of a letter, dated September 27, 2008, documenting an 
increase in his pay for good performance. (AE A) He submitted a copy of the recent 
performance evaluation, leading to that increase, which gives him a rating of 3.7 out of 
5.0. (AE I) Applicant’s section manager submitted a letter of recommendation in which 
he complimented Applicant for his work and efforts. The manager stated that Applicant 
is “dependable, reliable, comes to work on time and is never late. I can trust [Applicant] 
to make the best decision possible for this section. I would hate to lose a good hard 
working employee like [Applicant].” (AE F) The section leader of Applicant’s team is 
aware of Applicant’s financial problems and the steps he has taken to resolve them. He 
highly recommends him, writing: “[Applicant] has shown me that he is willing to learn, 
reliable, dedicated, motivated and honest.” (AE G) A colleague of Applicant, who has 
worked with him since November 2007, has also assisted him in resolving his debts. He 
stated, “I find [Applicant] to be extremely trustworthy and devoted to his job and the 
ideals of a safe and secure nation.” (AE H)  
 
 During his testimony, Applicant honestly acknowledged his debts. He candidly 
explained how they occurred and the steps he has taken to resolve them. With help 
from his parents, he has learned to manage his finances more responsibly and maintain 
his budget. He uses an accounting software program to monitor his finances. He is 
adamantly opposed to using credit cards. He received several hours of credit 
counseling before he was discharged from the Navy in March 2006.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                            
4Neither of these debts is included in the SOR and will not be considered in an analysis of 
disqualifying conditions, but will be considered in the whole person analysis.  
 
 
 
 
5
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
6
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
potentially applicable in this case. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. Applicant began 
accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt after he left the Navy in March 
2006 that he could not pay until he began his current position in November 2007. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifications. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. 
AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant=s financial delinquencies arose two years ago, in 2006, and continued 
into December 2007, when he began addressing them.  Because the problems are 
recent and not isolated, his previous judgment is called into question and AG ¶ 20(a) 
cannot apply.  
 
Applicant accumulated debts after he was discharged from the Navy and was 
unable to obtain full-time employment for almost two years. His inability to find a decent 
job for a period of time was a circumstance beyond his control. Because he did not 
 
 
 
 
7
present evidence indicating that he attempted to manage his debts while unemployed, 
AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.  
 
After learning of the extent of his financial problems from the Government in the 
fall of 2007, Applicant entered into a repayment plan in December 2007 to resolve all of 
his outstanding debts. To-date, he has paid one SOR debt and deposited about $8,700 
with a company that is resolving his other delinquent debts. He produced evidence that 
he has paid in full one debt for $544, not included in the SOR. He received credit 
counseling from the Navy in 2006 and advice from his parents. Based on his budget, 
which includes a workable repayment plan, his finances are under control, as a result of 
his good-faith efforts to resolve or pay his debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) 
have some application 
 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) and AG ¶ 20(f).   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 26-year-old unmarried 
man, who served in the Navy for five and a half years before being administratively 
discharged in March 2006. Prior to that discharge, he was building an impressive naval 
career and earning a good salary before being discharged due to his misconduct. After 
being discharged from the Navy, he was unemployed for almost two years resulting in 
the accumulation of about $40,000 of debt, including $16,000 owed to the DoD for a 
reenlistment bonus that he did not fulfill, and $4,800 to his parents. After reviewing his 
credit reports with the Government in early fall of 2007, he promptly entered into a 
repayment plan in December 2007, to resolve and pay his obligations. While the terms 
of that agreement appear to favor the company, Applicant’s decision to immediately 
 
 
 
 
8
address his issues demonstrated responsible financial judgment. At this time, he has 
reduced the DoD debt to $10,500 and loan from his parents to $1,100. He paid other 
debts through the plan that were not listed in the SOR. He has contributed about $8,700 
to his debt reduction program. According to the terms of that agreement, he anticipates 
having the debts paid by July 2010. Over the course of the last year or more, Applicant 
appears to have matured and has credibly expressed his commitment to achieving 
financial solvency. 
 
Applicant’s manager, team leader and colleague, are aware of his financial 
problems, diminishing any potential for financial exploitation. All of them recommend 
him for a security clearance. His first year’s performance evaluation notes a higher than 
average rating. He is dedicated to his job and his co-workers confirm his honesty and 
dedication.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of the above 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j: For Applicant 
    
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
