 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09662 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations.  
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 28, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On December 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 17, 2008. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated December 19, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on January 15, 2009, and 
the case was assigned to Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross on January 22, 2009. It 
was reassigned to me on January 23, 2009, due to caseload considerations. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on January 28, 2009, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
February 10, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, seven Government exhibits and one Applicant exhibit were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on February 13, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.c. of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and she is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been divulged. She previously 
held a SECRET security clearance from about 1991 until 2002, while employed by 
another defense contractor.1 With the exception of a period from February 2002 until 
April 2005, when she was a stay-at-home homemaker, and a one month period in 2008, 
when she was laid off,2 Applicant has been gainfully employed since 1991. She has 
been employed by the same defense contractor, or a successor corporation, since May 
2008, and currently serves as an administrative assistant.3 
 
Applicant was married in 2001, and divorced in 2005.4 She has one child, born in 
2001.5  
1 Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP, dated May 28, 2008), at 15, 27.  
 
2 Id. at 12-13, 15. 
 
3 Id. at 12. 
 
4 Id. at 18. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
In 1997, Applicant’s debts, consisting primarily of credit card debt, were 
discharged in bankruptcy under Chapter 7.6 Over subsequent years, Applicant, either 
individually or jointly, has financed and purchased a number of family residences 
without difficulties. In July 2003, she received a $201,622 home mortgage from Chase. 
That mortgage was paid until July 2004, when the account was closed as paid.7 
 
In November 2004, she applied for mortgage financing from Wachovia on a new 
residence. Applicant and her boyfriend jointly applied because they were living together. 
He was apparently not eligible, so the mortgage lender simply put the mortgage in her 
name, but using their combined salaries. She was advised by the lender that she could 
afford the type of mortgage they were offering her, provided it was broken down into a 
basic adjustable rate 1st mortgage and a 2nd mortgage or home equity line of credit.8 
She put $50,000 down9 and secured a mortgage in the amount of $311,250 with an 
accompanying home equity or 2nd mortgage in the amount of $62,250, for a total of 
$373,500.10  
 
Applicant dutifully paid her monthly mortgage without any difficulty for an 
unspecified period of time.11 At some point, that mortgage adjusted and her monthly 
payment increased. In an effort to hold her expenses down, Applicant refinanced her 
residence with Countrywide in the amount of $356,000.12 The Wachovia mortgage was 
satisfactorily paid off and the account was closed.13 
 
In January 2007, she refinanced her residence again, this time with 
Homecomings Financial, a subsidiary of GMAC, and received a fixed rate 1st mortgage 
in the amount of $360,000,14 and a 2nd mortgage in the amount of $67,500, with an 
interest rate of 10.25 per cent.15 The Countrywide mortgage was satisfactorily paid off 
 
5 Id. at 21. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 19, 2005), at 2. 
 
7 Government Exhibit 3 (Combined Credit Report, dated July 1, 2008), at 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-28. 
 
9 Id. at 29. 
 
10 Id.  Applicant seemed to recall the purchase price of the home as $400,000, but the credit report indicates 
the combined total of the two mortgages was actually $373,500.  Government Exhibit 3, supra note 7, at 14. 
 
11 Tr. at 30. 
 
12 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 7, at 7. 
 
13 Id. at 14. 
 
14 Id. at 4; Tr. at 30. 
 
15 Government Exhibit 2 (Account Statement, dated June 13, 2008), attached to Interrogatories, dated 
October 30, 2008. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
and the account was closed.16 At the time she refinanced the residence with 
Homecomings Financial, she was told the provisions of the instrument were identical to 
those in the Countrywide mortgage, and her monthly payments would be lower.17 
Applicant first learned that there was a problem when she received her first tax bill. The 
taxes were supposed to be included in the escrow to be paid monthly, but because of 
an oversight on the part of the mortgage lender, the provision was not originally 
included.18 As a result of her complaint, the matter was “straightened out” by the 
mortgage lender, but the result was a higher monthly payment for Applicant.19  The 
monthly payment was increased from nearly $1,518 to nearly $3,076.20 
 
At some point, not otherwise specified, Applicant and her boyfriend split up and 
he moved out of the residence.21 The loss of his rent contribution and the unanticipated 
higher monthly payment made it more difficult for Applicant to maintain her payments 
current. To do so, she withdrew money from her retirement account to make up the 
deficit.22  She started to come up short, and distraught over the situation, discussed her 
alternatives with the mortgage lender.23 Aurora Loan, the new holder of the 1st 
mortgage, advised her to either sell the property at a pre-foreclosure or “short sale,” or 
let it go into foreclosure.24  After struggling with the increased payments for about two or 
three months, she moved out of the house.25 
 
In mid-2008, Aurora Loan commenced the foreclosure process on the 1st 
mortgage, now totaling $363,000.26 At about the same time, Homecomings Financial 
placed the 2nd mortgage, with a principal balance of $67,500 and an outstanding 
balance of principal, interest, and late charges totaling nearly $6,393, into collection.27  
The residence has been vacant since she left.28 
 
 
16 Government Exhibit 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 7, 2009), at 2. 
 
17 Tr. at 47-49. 
 
18 Id. at 48-49. 
 
19 Id. at 49-50. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 2 (Escrow Account Statement, dated July 1, 2008), supra note 15. 
 
21 Tr. at 32. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Id. at 33. 
 
24 Id. at 36. 
 
25 Id. at 32. 
 
26 Government Exhibit 7, supra note 16, at 3. 
 
27 Government Exhibit 2 (Account Statement, dated June 13, 2008), supra note 20. 
 
28 Tr. at 36-37. 
 
5 
                                      
 
 
Applicant and her son now reside in a rental apartment.29  Her monthly net salary 
is $2,245, and after severely curtailing her monthly expenses down from $2,362 to 
$1,509, she has a net remainder of $1,821 for discretionary spending.30 With the 
exception of the purported mortgage deficiencies, all their other accounts and expenses 
are now current.31 
 
The SOR identified the two purportedly continuing mortgage deficiencies and an 
allegation that Applicant had a negative monthly net remainder. Those three allegations 
listed in the SOR, and their respective purported current status, according the credit 
reports, financial records and correspondence, as well as Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below: 
 
SOR ¶ TYPE DEBT OR ALLEGATION AMOUNT STATUS 
1.a. 1st mortgage $363,000 Foreclosure process 
1.b. 2nd mortgage $72,131 Foreclosure process 
1.c. Minus monthly net remainder -$629 Improvement to +$1,821 
 
Applicant has been characterized by current and former colleagues and 
supervisors in extraordinarily favorable terms: organized, efficient, extremely competent, 
responsible, reliable, dedicated, high integrity, trustworthy, well liked, self-motivated, 
great asset, “can do” attitude, organized, and exhibits the highest standards of ethics 
and conduct.32 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
                                                          
29 Id. at 35. 
 
30 Personal Financial Statement, dated December 19, 2008, attached to Response to SOR.  In an effort to 
reduce her expenses, Applicant tightened her belt, ceased taking one medication, cancelled her house telephone, 
reduced cable television and utility expenses, reduced car expenses, and generally lowered her lifestyle to where she 
is “surviving.” 
 
31 Tr. at 41. 
 
32 Applicant Exhibit A (Character references and assorted Performance Review and Planning Forms, various 
dates). 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”33 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
33 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns as well. The evidence is sufficient to establish AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
As noted above, with the exception of a period from February 2002 until April 
2005, when she was a stay-at-home homemaker, and a one month period in 2008, 
when she was laid off, Applicant has been gainfully employed since 1991. In 2004, she 
obtained financing for her residence, and subsequently refinanced it several more 
times, each time, hoping to lower her monthly mortgage payments. Each time she 
applied for a mortgage, Applicant presented her financial background as part of her 
application for the mortgage loan. Unfortunately, a combination of circumstances 
subsequently served her poorly, and she found her most recent 1st mortgage provisions 
in error (caused by the mortgage lender). When they were corrected, her monthly 
payments skyrocketed from nearly $1,518 to nearly $3,076. She was soon unable to 
continue to pay her monthly mortgage payments.  Unable to generate a pre-foreclosure 
or “short sale” in the non-existent real estate market, she followed the mortgage lender’s 
advice and abandoned the residence to possible foreclosure. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
When “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., the loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances” is also potentially mitigating under AG & 20(b). 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is 
potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@34 Also, AG & 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
34 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue” may apply. 
 
As noted above, the normal overriding concern pertaining to financial 
considerations in the security clearance context is that “[f]ailure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. . . .” 
(emphasis supplied).  But these are not “normal” times, for the world in general, and the 
United States in particular, is faced with economic chaos, plummeting real estate 
values, tightened credit, corporate layoffs and bankruptcies, diminished savings and 
retirement accounts, financial institution failures and takeovers, and soaring 
unemployment.  
   
We no longer think in terms of millions or even billions of dollars when describing 
deficits, for in this new world order, trillions of dollars have become the new standard.  
We are in economic turmoil, with posturing and corporate greed running rampant; where 
credit is unavailable; where thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of otherwise 
innocent bystanders have become victims by losing their homes to foreclosure and their 
jobs to these uncertain times; and where the popular responses are to point the fingers 
of blame and throw unprecedented amounts of money, characterized as stimulus funds, 
into the abyss with the hope of success.  
   
This economic catastrophe appears to be the “perfect storm” where the 
confluence of greed, irresponsible risk-taking, regulatory failure and inadequate 
oversight, malfeasance, misfeasance, and nonfeasance on the part of some segments 
of corporate America, our financial institutions, and political institutions, has resulted in 
unintentional consequences or “collateral damage” to the innocents.  In the past, these 
unconscionable actions were overlooked in the race for enrichment.   
   
To determine if an applicant is such an unintentional victim or a willing participant 
and complicit, in an otherwise unwise or irresponsible monetary scheme, or a person 
with poor self-control or lack of judgment, an analysis of the individual’s original 
intentions and actions is essential. In this instance, since her 1997 bankruptcy, 
Applicant’s financial history and actions reveals no evidence of poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or a willingness to abide by rules and regulations. To the contrary, her sole 
goal was to obtain a mortgage with an affordable monthly payment, and when the 
mortgage payments adjusted upward, she refinanced to again obtain a lower monthly 
 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
payment.  Her efforts were responsible and disciplined. Applicant’s current situation was 
caused by other factors, including an error by an apparently knowledgeable but 
careless, and possibly unscrupulous, mortgage lender.  
   
In January 2007, aware of Applicant’s inability to pay the monthly mortgage 
payments to Homecomings Financial without the contributions of her boyfriend, that 
institution, nevertheless, appraised her residence and found she qualified for a 
$360,000 1st mortgage and a $67,000 2nd mortgage, although the real estate value of 
her home had already started to plummet. Rather than ignoring the facts, it should have 
anticipated the result.  It was evident that she could not afford the new mortgage, for 
she did not lie or represent her financial status in her application for the mortgage. It 
was seemingly another example of a disregard of lending guidelines. 
 
While the foreclosures are in the process, they are apparently on hold and have 
not actually taken place, despite the residence being unoccupied for about one year. 
This situation presents an interesting conundrum, for if the foreclosures do occur, under 
state law, Applicant may not be liable for either the unpaid mortgages or the 
deficiencies, and the lien holders would be limited to the property. Under California law, 
there is a provision called the Anti-Deficiency Statute,35 which states in relevant part: 
 
No deficiency judgment shall lie in any event after a sale of real property 
or an estate for years therein for failure of the purchaser to complete his or 
her contract of sale, or under a deed of trust or mortgage given to the 
vendor to secure payment of the balance of the purchase price of that real 
property or estate for years therein, or under a deed of trust or mortgage 
on  a dwelling for not more than four families given to a lender to secure 
repayment of a loan which was in fact used to pay all or part of the 
purchase price of that dwelling occupied, entirely or in part, by the 
purchaser. 
 
Under this section, generally if there is a foreclosure on a dwelling and there is a 
deficiency, the lender has no recourse regarding “purchase money loans,” also called 
“non-recourse loans,” the amounts set forth in both the 1st and the 2nd mortgages used 
to finance the dwelling purchase. The collateral or dwelling is considered full 
satisfaction. In addition, there is another pertinent law, called the One Form of Action 
Rule,36 which states in relevant part: 
 
There can be but one form of action for the recovery of any debt, or the 
performance of any right secured by mortgage upon real property.  
 
Considering the unusual circumstances of today’s economy in general, and the 
series of events involving Applicant’s mortgage loans in particular, Applicant’s actions 
and her otherwise good financial status, there are clear indications that Applicant’s 
35 Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 580(b). 
 
36 Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 726(a). 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
financial issue has been resolved and is now largely under control.  The evidence 
establishes AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e), and partially 20(b)37 because the 
circumstances are unusual and unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant met with a mortgage 
lender at Homecomings Financial where she presented her financial background as part 
of her application for the mortgage loan. She, alone, was qualified for a particular loan, 
even though her boyfriend’s salary was considered, and it was granted to her. She was 
told the provisions of the instrument were identical to those in the Countrywide 
mortgage, and her monthly payments would be lower. However, she discovered there 
was a problem when she received her first tax bill because the taxes were supposed to 
be included in the escrow to be paid monthly, but because of an oversight on the part of 
the mortgage lender, the provision was not included in this mortgage. The mortgage 
lender “straightened out” the error, but the result was a higher monthly payment for 
Applicant, with the monthly payment increasing from nearly $1,518 to nearly $3,076. 
 
The loss of her boyfriend’s rent contribution and the unanticipated higher monthly 
payment made it more difficult for Applicant to maintain her payments so she withdrew 
money from her retirement account in an effort to make up the deficit. The new holder of 
the 1st mortgage, advised her to either sell the property at a pre-foreclosure or “short 
sale” or let it go into foreclosure.  After struggling with the increased payments for about 
37 For the purposes of my analysis, in this instance, I have considered both the tax escrow error of the 
lending institution, Applicant’s split from her boyfriend and intended co-purchaser, and the general global economic 
problems, to be such conditions which justify, at least, partial recognition. 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
two or three months, she moved out of the house. (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(2), 2(a)(5), 
and 2(a)(7).)  
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether Applicant’s mortgage debts are 
resolved; it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to 
hold a security clearance. I am mindful that while any one factor, considered in isolation, 
might put Applicant’s credit history in a sympathetic light, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.38 Considering the circumstances behind the mortgage 
loans given to her by the mortgage lenders, her employment history, her otherwise 
outstanding reputation, the decline in real estate values, and her continuing good-faith 
efforts, the security concerns are mitigated. (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(8), and 2(a)(9).)   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
38 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006) 
