1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04059
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 21,
2007. On October 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 20, 2008, and elected to
have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted
the Government’s written case on January 22, 2009. Applicant received a complete file
of relevant material (FORM) on January 26, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s
The Government submitted five items in support of its contentions.1
2
case.  Applicant submitted additional information in a timely manner. The case was1
assigned to me on February 10, 2009. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, signed November 4, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegation in ¶ 1.a of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support
his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school and obtained his college degree in August 1973. He is married and has one
child. He has worked as a designer/project manager for his current employer since
August 2002 (Item 1).
Applicant used marijuana from about January 1990 until about May 2007. He
admitted that he used approximately six to twelve times. He stated that his marijuana
use may continue in the future. He used the illegal drug with friends on “game nights.”
(Item 5) Applicant was interviewed in March 2008. During the interview he stated he
smoked approximately 1-2 puffs of a marijuana cigarette. He admitted that he would use
whenever the opportunity presented itself at his friends’ homes. 
Applicant used marijuana in the beginning out of curiosity. He believes he is not
affected by the use. He has never been arrested or charged for any drug related
offenses (Item 4).
In his response to June 2008 interrogatories, Applicant explained that he failed to
mention that in 2006 he ate a brownie laced with marijuana which gave him an
“uncomfortable reaction.” He advised that he doubted that he would use the drug again
(Item 5). This statement is inconsistent with his security application and his answer to
the SOR.
Applicant submitted a statement in response to the FORM. He advised that he
wanted his application stamped “Not Approved.” He explained that he answered all the
security clearance questions truthfully and contends that his record is no worse and
much better than some in much higher governmental positions. He also elaborated that
he did not want a security clearance. He filled out the paperwork as a courtesy to his
employer.
Applicant expressly stated that the entire process involving a security clearance
is “demeaning.” He compared his trustworthiness in regard to drug use with senior
Government officials who may use drugs. He does not believe that the Government’s
security concerns over his drug use are worthwhile. 
3
Applicant’s employer rates him as a “stellar employee.” They believe that it would
be a great benefit to the company if Applicant had a security clearance.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
4
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 25(a), Aany drug abuse@ is potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia” is also potentially disqualifying.
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana from 1970 until at least May 2007. The multiple
use is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
admitted May 2007 use of marijuana is recent. He has used marijuana since 1990 and
until at least approximately two years ago. Considering Applicant has used marijuana
over a period of 17 years, his conduct should not be deemed infrequent. This mitigating
condition does not apply. He expressed a clear disdain for the security clearance
process. His inconsistent explanation as to future illegal drug use casts doubt on his
trustworthiness, reliability and judgment. I do not find that this mitigating condition
applies.  
Under AG ¶ 26(b), it may be mitigating where Aa demonstrated intent not to
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.” Applicant uses marijuana with friends on
social occasions. He stated in his March 2008 interview that he would use marijuana if
an opportunity presents itself. Though he stated he doubted he would use marijuana
again in response to June 2008 interrogatories, his inconsistent explanations as to
future use are not credible and cast doubt on his trustworthiness, reliability and
judgment. I do not find that these mitigating conditions apply.  
5
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well-educated
professional. He has a long history of smoking marijuana. He admitted using with
friends at social occasions and may do so in the future. His recent decision to stop
using marijuana because he became ill in 2006 contradicts his Answer to the SOR. In
February 2008 he stated that “if an opportunity to smoke marijuana presents itself and I
want to do it, I will.” This undercuts any claim that he has expressed a demonstrated
intent not to abuse drugs in the future. In addition, Applicant expressed a lack of respect
for the security clearance process. He appears to lack the understanding about the
Government’s concern over drug abuse. Finally, Applicant provided a handwritten
statement on his Answer that he finds the security clearance process “demeaning.” I
find that the lack of understanding of the process undercuts any confidence the
Government would have in his reliability and judgment.  
Applicant has a long employment record. He voluntarily reported his marijuana
use on his security application. I considered his stellar rating as an employee with his
company. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all the
reasons discussed above, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his drug involvement.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
6
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
