 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08037 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations.  
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 2, 2007, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On November 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 12, 2008. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated November 13, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on December 8, 2008, and 
the case was assigned to Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul on December 12, 2008. 
It was reassigned to me on January 23, 2009, due to caseload considerations. A Notice 
of Hearing was issued on February 2, 2009, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, 
on February 12, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, six Government exhibits and one Applicant exhibit were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on February 19, 2009. 
 
The record was kept open until February 19, 2009, to enable Applicant to 
supplement the record by submitting a copy of his DD Form 214, Certificate of Release 
or Discharge from Active Duty, as well as evidence of satisfaction of a court-ordered 
payment of child support arrearage.  Applicant submitted same on February 13, 2009.  
His submissions (marked as Applicant’s Exhibits B and C) were admitted into evidence 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole factual allegation in ¶ 1.a. 
of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the SECRET security clearance previously granted to him.  Applicant’s family has 
a long history of military service to the United States. His grandfather served in the U.S. 
Army, and his father was a Vietnam veteran with the United States Marine Corps. 
Applicant served with the U.S. Air Force and retired as a decorated Master Sergeant in 
2006 after 22 years of honorable active service.1 During the first Gulf War, he was 
deployed overseas as part of Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm.2 He has 
1 Tr. at 18, 34-36; Government Exhibit 1 (e-QIP, dated Aug. 2, 2007), at 36.  
 
2 Tr. at 36. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
been gainfully employed by the same defense contractor since June 2007, and currently 
serves as an avionics technician.3 
 
Applicant was married at the age of 19 in 1985.4 He and his wife had two 
children, born in February 1987 and January 1992, respectively, and they subsequently 
divorced in March 1992.5 His children both presently reside with his ex-spouse and her 
husband.6 
 
In late 1989, Applicant and his spouse returned to the U.S. from an overseas 
assignment, and he was assigned to a military facility in South Carolina. It was while 
they were there that their second child was born. Subsequently they separated, and 
eventually divorced.  He was then assigned to another base in the western U.S. and 
she and the children returned to their home state in the mid-west.  He initially furnished 
her with temporary child support of $260 per month, but felt that the amount was 
insufficient to care for both children so he agreed to raise the amount to $450.7 In 
addition, he paid her alimony.8 At one point he was paying her a monthly total of $805.9 
For the next three or four years, although he experienced difficulties with his ex-spouse 
over visitation rights, especially when she refused Applicant the opportunities to have 
his youngest child visit him,10 Applicant dutifully continued his child support payments, 
through allotment, without incident.11 While exercising periodic visitation rights in the 
mid-west, he provided extra clothing and shoes for both children, over and above his 
normal payments.12 
 
At some point, about four years after the divorce, Applicant became concerned 
that his ex-spouse was misusing the child support he was providing.  The children were 
dressed poorly and she was apparently spending the money on a new automobile and 
her credit card.13 Unable to resolve their differences, Applicant unilaterally stopped all 
child support payments for about five or six years before resuming them.14 For 
3 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
4 Id. at 27. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. at 30-31; Tr. at 55. 
 
7 Tr. at 40. 
 
8 Id. at 65. 
 
9 Id. 
 
10 Id. at 70-71. 
 
11 Id. at 40-41. 
 
12 Id. at 41. 
 
13 Id. at 41, 66. 
 
14 Id. at 42-43. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
approximately three years, Applicant’s older son resided with him, but Applicant initially 
continued to pay his ex-spouse $200 per month.15 His youngest son moved in with 
Applicant and his older son for a period of six months, and Applicant continued to make 
the full child support payments.16 At no time while either or both children were residing 
with him, did Applicant ever petition the court or ask his ex-spouse to either suspend his 
child support payments or for her to provide him with child support.17 In 2001, Applicant 
was reassigned overseas, so the children returned to reside with their mother.18 During 
the next year, he did not make any child support payments.19 In 2004, while serving in 
another overseas location, Applicant’s wages were garnished in the amount of $450 per 
month.20 About two years ago, an arrearage amount of $90 per month also started 
being taken from his salary.21 
 
Applicant’s youngest son resided with him from March until June 2008, and 
Applicant wanted him to remain with him, but his ex-spouse refused.22 In July 2008, the 
state where the divorce was granted filed a collection action against Applicant for child 
support arrearage in the amount of $30,718.23 
 
On February 9, 2009, Applicant and his attorney appeared in court, and with an 
agreement of both parties, an Order was entered reducing the child support arrearage.  
Under the Order, the civil contempt charge would be purged by Applicant paying his ex-
spouse $18,000, plus costs, no later than March 27, 2009, and the matter would be 
considered closed.24 Once the payment is made, the monthly garnishment of $90 will 
cease, and the amount of his continuing child support will return to $450 per month.25 
On February 12, 2009, Applicant made two payments, totaling $3,350, and indicated 
that since he has the money in an account, the remaining amount will be forwarded to 
his attorney within a week, well before the deadline.26 
 
 
15 Id. at 43-44. 
 
16 Id. at 45. 
 
17 Id. at 45-46. 
 
18 Id. at 46. 
 
19 Id. at 46-47. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 39. 
 
21 Government Exhibit 2 (Retiree Account Statement, dated September 9, 2008, attached to Interrogatories, 
dated September 11, 2008), at 1-2; Tr. at 62-63. 
 
22 Tr. at 68-69. 
 
23 Government Exhibit 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated July 29, 2008), at 2. 
 
24 Applicant Exhibit A (Order, dated February 9, 2009), at 2. 
 
25 Tr. at 63. 
 
26 Id. at 52, 59. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
Upon reflection, if Applicant were confronted with the same facts today as he was 
in the past, he would have done things differently.  He would not have resorted to 
frustration-generated self-help by stopping the child support payments but, instead, 
would have gone back to court to resolve the unsettled matters.27 
 
Applicant’s finances are unremarkable, and he has no other financial issues or 
difficulties.28 In fact, according to his recent Personal Financial Statement, completed in 
September 2008, Applicant has a monthly sum of over $3,200 for discretionary 
expenses.29 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”30 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
27 Id. at 52. 
 
28 Id. at 79. 
 
29 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Financial Statement, dated September 4, 2008, attached to 
Interrogatories, supra note 21, at 1. 
 
30 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
6 
                                      
 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. The evidence is insufficient to establish AG ¶ 19(a) because 
Applicant was never unable or unwilling to make the payments; he simply was under the 
erroneous impression that he could force his ex-spouse to abide by what he construed 
as the letter or spirit of the court-ordered guidelines for child support payments.  
Moreover, although there were periods in which Applicant should have made those 
payments, there were also lengthy periods when, if he had gone back to court, the 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
payments might have been suspended because the children were residing with him and 
not their mother. 
 
The evidence does, however, establish AG ¶ 19(c).  Over a period of years, 
without court approval, due to frustration over his ex-spouse’s use of the child support 
he paid, as well as her thwarting his attempts at child visitation with his youngest son, 
Applicant periodically did not comply with the child support Order. His ex-spouse’s 
failure to comply with the visitation requirements of the Order did not vitiate his 
responsibility to continue those child support payments. In his mind, Applicant’s 
motivation might have been noble and in the best interests of the children. 
Nevertheless, they constitute a history of not meeting that one financial obligation.  
Accordingly, AG ¶ 19(c) applies.   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial considerations. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is 
potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@31 Also, AG & 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue” may apply. 
 
Applicant=s periodic unilateral stoppage of child support payments because of 
disputes and grievances with his ex-spouse, in contravention of the child support Order, 
is the single most potentially troublesome issue. The child support arrearage, when 
considering the circumstances at the time, with Applicant either frustrated with his ex-
spouse or during periods when his children resided with him, is unlikely to recur 
because of several current circumstances.  One son, who turned 22 only days after the 
hearing, is currently enrolled in college. The other son, now 17 and in high school, will 
not be Applicant’s responsibility much longer.  Furthermore, now that Applicant and his 
31 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
wife have agreed on a resolution of their long-standing dispute, and he has engaged the 
professional services of a domestic relations attorney to counsel, represent, and guide 
him, he is better aware of the potential problems of self-help regarding the stoppage of 
child support. 
 
Considering the evidence pertaining to the confusion over child support with 
changing living arrangements for the children, as well as the ensuing court action, these 
circumstances no longer exist. There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
issue has been resolved and is under control.  He is well on his way toward satisfying 
the child support arrearage and is timely with his current child support payments. His 
actions in addressing his debt indicate good-faith efforts on his part as well as showing 
clear indications the problem is now largely under control.  The evidence establishes 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In his frustration, Applicant travelled 
down the wrong path toward resolving his disputes with his ex-spouse. Some of his 
actions were brought about by the confusion surrounding his child support 
responsibilities when his children were residing with him rather than their mother. He 
eventually sought legal guidance, and has taken decisive affirmative action and made 
substantial good-faith efforts to pay off or resolve his sole legitimate delinquent debt, the 
child support arrearage. The age of his children, the mutual agreement with his ex-
spouse in resolving their disputes, and the newly found wisdom gained from the bad 
experience, along with an attorney to counsel and represent him, greatly diminish the 
likelihood of recurrence. (See AG && 2(a)(2), 2(a)(5), 2(a)(6), and 2(a)(9).)  
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are resolved; it is whether 
his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
I am mindful that while any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
credit history in a sympathetic light, I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.32 Considering his continuing good-faith efforts, the circumstances behind the 
child support arrearage, the nature of his legitimate disputes with his ex-spouse, and his 
questionable responsibility for child support when the children were residing with him for 
lengthy periods, his past financial situation, as it pertains to the former child support 
arrearage, is insufficient to raise continuing security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
32 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006) 
