                                                                       
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02087
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On August 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 3, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 29, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
December 16, 2008.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, or deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of three exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
2
and two exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 24, 2008.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified the security clearance
application (e-QIP) he completed in June 2007 by omitting his (a) past drug use and (b)
his drug-related arrests (eight in all) between 1989 and 2001. Under Guideline J, the
falsification and underlying arrest allegations made under Guideline E, were
incorporated and re-alleged.
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted his alleged arrests and criminal
charges but denied falsifying his security clearance application.  He claimed the charges
covered in subparagraphs 1.b(5) through (8) were dismissed or dropped.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old-frequency controller for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant has been employed by his current employer since May 2007 (ex. 1;
R.T., at 24-25).  He is an Air Force (AF) veteran and considers himself to be very
patriotic (R.T., at 26).  He divorced his first wife in 1996 and remarried two years ago,
after dating his current spouse for four to five years (R.T., at 37, 74).  He has 15-year-
old son who lives with him and his current wife (R.T., at 28).
Applicant was introduced to methamphetamine in the late 1980s (believed to be
1989).  He was depressed at the time over losing his job and having no place to live
(R.T., at 29-30).  He experimented with the drug with friends and family members in
social settings (R.T., at 30).  He estimates to have used methamphetamine monthly for
about five years (R.T., at 30), before increasing his use frequency of the drug in the
mid-1990s to twice a week (R.T., at 31).  During this time period, he was living with
people who used it and made it more readily available to him for his personal use. 
Between 1989 and 2001, Applicant was involved in eight separate drug-related
arrests.  In 1989, he was arrested for methamphetamine possession after police found
meth in his car and tested him positive for the drug. Applicant pleaded no contest to
possession charges, and the court sentenced him to three years of probation  (see exs.
2 and 3).  Records show that he was arrested again in 1991 and charged with
possession of a controlled substance (methamphetamine), possession of drug
paraphernalia, and being under the influence of a controlled substance. The court found
Applicant guilty of these charges and sentenced him to 90 days in jail.  The court also
extended his probation stemming from his 1989 charges for an additional three years
3
and ordered him to attend weekly drug-related counseling (see ex. 2).  Applicant
recalled attending weekly drug-awareness group sessions, but he did not complete the
program (ex. 2).
Records confirm that Applicant was charged with (a) possession of concentrated
cannabis and violation of probation in 1993, for which he was fined, (b) possession  of a
controlled substance (methamphetamine), use/under the influence of a controlled
substance, and possession of controlled substance paraphernalia in 1995, for which he
pleaded no contest to the two possession charges and received extended probation to
March 1998, ©) being under the influence of a controlled substance in 1999, which was
dismissed, (d) under the influence of a controlled substance in November 2000, which
was dismissed, and (e) controlled substance paraphernalia possession, being under the
influence of a controlled substance, and possession of a controlled substance in May
2001 (see exs. 2 and 3).  These 2001 charges were dropped after Applicant supplied
the names of known drug dealers to the police (see ex. 2; R.T., at 50-51).
Applicant was treated for drug abuse in 1999 in accordance with his court-
ordered treatment conditions (R.T., at 31-32).  His treatment regimen consisted of a
three-month inpatient and aftercare program that stressed the 12-step program of Drugs
Anonymous (DA).  He used methamphetamine just a few times after completing his
drug rehabilitation program.
Faced with pressures from his wife and family to give up drugs, and concerned
about his future, Applicant quit using illegal drugs altogether in 2002 (see ex. 2; R.T., at
34-36, 60).  He no longer associates with people who use illegal substances.  Although
Applicant initially questioned the accuracy of the 1996-2002 time frame he used
methamphetamine for recreational purposes, he acknowledged the possibilities of his
using methamphetamine during this time frame when pressed by Department Counsel.
The record is lacking in any Applicant request to the agent to correct the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) summary of interview he was shown  (see ex. 2; R.T., at
35-37).   
 
Applicant was asked to complete an e-QIP in early June 2007.  Question 23 of
his questionnaire asked him about drug-related arrests (no time limits specified). When
answering subparagraph 32d, he checked “no.”  He checked “no,” too, when answering
question 24, which inquired about his use of illegal substances within the previous
seven years. Applicant attributes his question 23 omissions to confusion and
inadvertent mistakes over the date of his last use of methamphetamine (R.T., at 52-54).
Even though he was afforded permission to take the e-QIP home with him to complete,
he answered the questions in haste without double-checking with his wife for her
recollection of his last use of the drug (R.T., at 52-54).  
When answering question 24 of his e-QIP, Applicant explains that he misread the
question to include a similar seven-year limitation governing the scope of the question
(R.T., at 25-26, 52-57). He further explains that he could not remember the date of his
last drug-related arrest (in 2001), and thought over seven years had elapsed since his
4
last arrest involving illegal drugs (R.T., at 56).  He made no notes about the possible
dates of his last arrest in the comments section of the e-QIP, and made no voluntary
follow-up efforts to alert DoD of possible drug-related arrests within the seven-year time
frame he cited in hi se-QIP.   Applicant did express remorse for the inconvenience his
omissions have caused, and assured he has put his past behavior behind him (see ex.
B).  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding the inclusive periods of his use
of methamphetamine, his drug-related arrests and charges associated with them
(dismissals in four of the eight reported cases), and his claimed misunderstandings
about the scope of the respective questions, his explanations cannot be reconciled with
the time-line of events that culminated with his guilty plea to the 2001 amended
charges.  Miscalculating a drug cut-off date, or misreading a question might be plausible
if considered separately on a piece-meal basis.  When his omissions are considered
together, though, they tend more to reflect an omission pattern that is indicative of a
concerted  desire on Applicant’s part to suppress his extensive drug involvement from
DoD investigators.  Inferences cannot be averted here that his omissions were knowing
and intentional under all the circumstances manifest at the time, and calculated to
conceal his recurrent use of illegal substances and drug-related arrests. 
Not until confronted in an October 2007 interview by an OPM investigator about
his arrest record covering his eight drug-related arrests/charges did Applicant disclose
his arrest record and disposition of the same (see exs. 2 and 3; R.T., at 66-67).  After
showing Applicant his arrest record and eliciting admissions from Applicant about these
arrests, the OPM investigator asked Applicant whether he ever used illegal drugs (R.T.,
at 66-67).  He responded affirmatively to her questions.  After completing his statement,
the OPM investigator gave him a copy of her prepared statement for him to review.
Applicant made no changes to the statement and indicated the prepared statement
accurately reflected his answers (see ex. 2; R.T., at 66).  
 Applicant’s spouse assures she has always loved him, beginning when they
dated in high school (R.T., at 71, 73).  Still, she gave him an ultimatum after they got
back together in the 2002 time frame to clean up his finances and cease using drugs
(R.T., at 38, 74-76).  She credits him with changing his life for the better (R.T., at 74).
She is certain he would never jeopardize the Government’s national security interests.
Her impressions are sincere and are accepted. 
Applicant is well regarded by friends and coworkers who know him.  They
describe him as a responsible team paper who helps his colleagues in resolving
mission-related issues (see ex. A).  His pastor describes him as an active member of
his church’s faith community and one who enjoys a very good reputation in the
community for trustworthiness. His facility clearance officer (FSO) finds nothing
disqualifying in Applicant’s personnel security folder.  And Applicant’s mother credits
him with making a good life for his son and wife of two years (see ex. A).  She places
considerable emphasis on Applicant’s developed spiritual faith and the life he has made
for his son and wife.
5
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.”  Adjudication Guidelines (AG), ¶ 15.
               Criminal Conduct
The Concern: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶ 30.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
6
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a good frequency controller and devoted father and husband who
used illegal substances (methamphetamine) on a recurrent basis over a 13-year period
(1989 through 2002), and was arrested/charged on eight separate occasions during this
time for drug-related offenses.  When asked about his arrests and drug-related activities
in a June 2007 e-QIP, he answered in the negative.  Applicant did not disclose his past
drug use and arrests until confronted about his arrests by an OPM investigator four
months later in a follow-up interview (viz., in October 2007).  Security concerns are
raised over his omissions of his drug use and drug-related arrests. 
Falsification issues
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s multiple omissions of his drug use and drug-related arrests/charges in the
security clearance application he completed in June 2007, and in his withholding of his
arrest/charges until he was confronted in an ensuing OPM interview.  So much trust is
imposed on persons cleared to see classified information that deviation tolerances for
candor lapses are gauged very narrowly. 
Applicant makes clear that he approached questions 23 and 24 of his e-QIP with
the intent to withhold as much  information about his past use of illegal substances and
drug-related arrest history as he believed he could safely rationalize.  His omissions
were knowing, deliberate, and material to a determination about his clearance suitability.
They invite application of AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, falsification or
misrepresentation of relevant and material facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement or similar form used to conduct investigations,
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with, since he failed to promptly correct his
determined intentional e-QIP omissions and follow-up OPM interview before being
confronted by the OPM investigator about his drug-related arrest history.  In the past, the
7
Appeal Board has denied applicants availability of the predecessor mitigating condition
of MC ¶ 27(a),  “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” where the applicant
has waited many months to timely correct a known omission. Compare ISCR Case No.
97-0289 (App. Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (App. Bd. January
1995).  Even if Applicant’s corrections can be considered prompt (i.e., within four months
of his e-QIP omissions), his drug-related arrest acknowledgments were made only after
he was confronted with his arrest records by the interviewing OPM investigation, and
perforce do not qualify as “good faith” corrections under current AG mitigating condition,
MC ¶ 17(a).
By intentionally failing to disclose his prior drug use and drug-related arrests
charges in his e-QIP Applicant concealed materially important background information
needed for the government to properly process and evaluate his security updates.  His
attributed reasons for his omitting his drug use and arrest/charges (mistaken last use
and reading in a seven-year qualifier in the question covering his drug-related arrests)
are not sustainable grounds for averting inferences of falsification. 
 Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his multiple e-QIP drug use and
arrest/charge omissions and lack of any prompt, good faith corrections, Applicant’s
claims lack the necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he
knowingly and deliberately withheld material background information about his prior drug
use and arrest/charges.  Questions 23 and 24 are straightforward and contain no
ambiguous instructions that could reasonably be expected to trip up an applicant.
Applicant’s explanations considered together, and not in piecemeal, do not convincingly
demonstrate plausible confusion and mistake on his part when he responded to the
pertinent questions in his e-QIP.
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2(a) factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of Guideline E. 
Criminal implications of Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Applicant’s slate of multiple drug-related arrests over 13-year period and e-QIP
omissions are potentially criminal in nature.  Making a materially false statement under
18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious felony and is punishable by fine and incarceration. To be
material, a falsification must have a “a natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of
influencing, the decision-making body to which it is addressed.”  See United States v.
Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995).  Applicant’s omitted drug-related arrests (eight in all),
while reduced some in their overall seriousness by the dismissal or dropping of his last
four arrests (covered by subparagraphs 1.b(5) through 1.b(8), retain their overall material
significance to a security clearance eligibility assessment and merited  inclusion in
Applicant’s e-QIP.  
8
Applicant’s convictions that resulted from Applicant’s previous arrests (1989
through 1995), his arrests/charges that were dismissed or dropped, and his e-QIP
omissions retain enough serious trust implications to warrant consideration of  two
disqualifying conditions of AG ¶ 31.  DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless
of whether the person was formally charged,” have application to his many drug-related
arrests over a 12-year period and his most recent e-QIP omissions.  
To be sure, mitigation of the criminal features of his omissions falls along a little
bit different fault line than is the case with personal conduct considerations.  Here,
Applicant’s positive work record, impressions of his pastor, and his demonstrated family
commitments play some role in mitigating criminal conduct coverage of his omissions.
MC ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training
or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement,”
has application. Employment of this guideline and the use of separate whole-person
weighing of Applicant’s actions have only limited application to Applicant’s lengthy
pattern of drug-related arrests and imputed intentional omissions. 
With the aid of the lessons he has learned since his marriage to his current wife
and the responsibility he has shown in the care for his young son, Applicant has
demonstrated important improvements in his maturity and responsibility levels.
Employment of MC ¶ 32(d) might weigh heavily in applicant’s favor were it not for his
determined intentional e-QIP omissions.  
However, there is more to be considered in determining whether the criminal
conduct concerns can be mitigated than his omissions.  Weighing the benefits of his
shown professional achievements and his family/community support in juxtaposition to
his collective arrests and omission history do not satisfy the rehabilitation requirements
of either MC ¶ 32(d) or an overall whole person assessment. Put another way, the
considered application of the AG mitigating conditions for criminal conduct and a
separate whole person analysis do not absolve or mitigate security concerns associated
with Applicant’s drug-related arrests and more recent omissions.  
Taking into account all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2(a), unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline J. 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
9
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a and 1:b: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 2.a and 2.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
