 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04834 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence), based on Applicant’s connections to Iran.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 12, 2005. On August 
13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines C and B. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 4, 2008; answered it on September 9, 
2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on September 12, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 29, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on November 25, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 28, 2008, scheduling the hearing for December 
15, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
presented the testimony of two witnesses. The record closed upon adjournment of the 
hearing on December 15, 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 22, 
2008. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Iran (Hearing Exhibit I). I took administrative notice as requested by Department 
Counsel, with no objection by Applicant. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.e, 
and she admitted the remaining allegations in the SOR. Her admissions in her answer 
and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old email and system administrator for a defense 
contractor. She has worked for her current employer since December 2002. She does 
not have a security clearance (Tr. 8).  
 
 Applicant was born in Iran and came to the U.S. in 1977 (Tr. 30). She completed 
high school in 1978, and attended college in the U.S., and she received a bachelor’s 
degree in interior design in 1983. She also received a diploma from a computer training 
center in the U.S. in October 1992. She has worked continuously as a contractor for 
various federal agencies since March 1993.  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in May 1996. She was married in July 2002 to a 
native of Iran who has been a U.S. citizen for about 30 years.  
 
 Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in 1998, after becoming a U.S. citizen, 
and used it to visit her family in Iran. Her Iranian passport expired in March 2003, and 
she renewed it in November 2003, in order to visit her father in Iran after he suffered a 
heart attack (GX 3 at 21). She visited her family in Iran again in October 2006. She 
informed her employer and her security officer of her travel to Iran (Tr. 34).  
 
Applicant’s Iranian passport expired on March 5, 2008. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories on May 27, 2008, she declared her intention to renew her Iranian 
passport in order to visit her ailing father if necessary (GX 3 at 3). At the hearing, she 
 
3 
 
 
testified she did not renew her Iranian passport because she learned it would raise 
issues regarding her eligibility for a clearance (Tr. 40). She testified she would be willing 
to destroy or surrender her expired Iranian passport and to “denounce” her Iranian 
citizenship if it is possible (Tr. 34, 40, 43-44). She has no current plans to visit Iran (Tr. 
61). In her closing statement, she referred to Iran as an evil country with an evil 
government (Tr. 60). 
 
 Applicant’s father, stepmother, one sister, and stepbrother are citizens and 
residents of Iran. Her father and stepmother are retired and have no relationship with 
the Iranian government. Her father is 88 years old and in poor health. Applicant testified 
she left Iran before her father remarried, and she has no relationship with her 
stepmother (Tr. 34). Her stepbrother is a student. He was born after Applicant left Iran, 
and she does not know him (Tr. 34). Her sister is a university graduate but is 
unemployed. She talks to her sister on a regular basis (GX 5 at 3). Her sister intends to 
come to the U.S. and was scheduled for an immigration interview in January 2009 (Tr. 
35-36).  
 
 Applicant applied for a trustworthiness determination in December 1998. On her 
application, she disclosed her family members in Iran and her travel to Iran in April to 
May 1998 (GX 1). 
 
 Applicant also has a sister, two nephews, and a granddaughter who are citizens 
and residents of the U.S. She referred to her husband, sister, and two nephews as her 
“first family.” She referred to her two nephews as “my life” (Tr. 31). All her husband’s 
family members are in the U.S. (Tr. 41).  
 
 Applicant and her husband own two residential properties in the U.S. Their home 
is worth about $1 million, and they also own a condominium worth about $400,000 (Tr. 
39). They own no property in Iran.  
 
 A former employer who is now a family friend testified for Applicant. While she 
did not hold a security clearance while working for the witness, she was entrusted with 
proprietary information. He described her as very honest and trustworthy (Tr. 48-50). 
 
 Applicant’s current manager, who has known her for seven years, described her 
as “wonderful” and his “right-hand person.” She has been entrusted with sensitive 
information and has never violated security procedures or compromised any information 
(Tr. 53-54). 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts. Iran is a 
theocratic Islamic republic dominated by Shia Muslim clergy, with ultimate political 
authority vested in a learned religious scholar. Iran’s government is hostile to the U.S. 
Current U.S. concerns about Iran are based on its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons 
and weapons of mass destruction; support for and involvement in international 
terrorism; support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its 
human rights abuses, including summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrest and 
 
4 
 
 
detention, and restrictions on civil liberties. Iran has provided guidance, training, and 
weapons to Shia political and militant groups in Iraq. It also provides encouragement, 
training, funding, and weapons to anti-Israeli terrorist groups in its efforts to undermine 
the Arab-Israeli peace process, and it advocates the destruction of Israel. The U.S. has 
designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism in 1984, and now regards it as the most 
active sponsor of terrorism in the world. The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Iran in 
April 1980, prohibits most trade with Iran, and uses multilateral sanctions and diplomatic 
pressure to contain the threats posed by Iran.  
 
I have also taken administrative notice that Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely Iranian citizens 
by the Iranian authorities, and they are required to enter and exit Iran on an Iranian 
passport. While traveling or residing in Iran, they are subject to surveillance, search, 
harassment, arrest, and imprisonment. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
5 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant exercises dual citizenship with Iran and the U.S. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); she possessed an Iranian passport issued in March 1998 and renewed it 
in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and she intends to renew her Iranian passport, which 
expired in March 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c). The concern under Guideline C is as follows: 
“When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country 
over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9.  
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision.  ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”  
ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 15, 1999).  
 
A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited 
to “possession of a current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). A disqualifying condition 
also may arise from “any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other 
than the United States.” AG ¶ 10(d). Applicant’s possession of an active Iranian 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen raises AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Her renewal of her Iranian 
 
6 
 
 
passport and use of it to enter and depart Iran after becoming a U.S. citizen raises AG ¶ 
10(d). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶10(a)(1) and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” AG ¶ 
11(a). This mitigating condition is established. Applicant was born in Iran of Iranian 
parents, but she left as a teenager and never returned, except for three visits to her 
family in 1998, 2003, and 2006.  
 
 Security concerns based on dual citizenship can be mitigated if “the individual 
has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” AG ¶ 11(b). This mitigating 
condition is established because Applicant testified she is willing to “denounce” her 
Iranian citizenship if it is possible.  
 
 Security concerns based on possession or use of a foreign passport may be 
mitigated if “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e). This mitigating condition is established 
because Applicant’s Iranian passport has expired, she does not intend to renew it, and 
she is willing to surrender or destroy the expired passport if necessary. She has refuted 
the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c that she intends to renew her Iranian passport. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s father, stepmother, sister, and stepbrother are 
citizens and residents of Iran (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b), and that she traveled to Iran in 
1998, 2003, and 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.c). 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s travel to Iran was solely to visit her family. Except for the fact that she 
used an Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran, her foreign travel has no independent 
security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). The 
totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family 
tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Under 
the old guidelines, any risk of foreign influence was sufficient to raise a potentially 
disqualifying condition. The new guidelines require a “heightened risk.” “Heightened 
risk” is a relative term denoting a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member living under a foreign government. Applicant has no significant contact 
with her stepmother or stepbrother, but she has contact as well as ties of affection and 
obligation with her father and sister. The requirement for a “heightened risk” in 
Applicant’s case is satisfied by the presence of her father and sister in Iran, the nature 
of the Iranian government, and its hostility towards the U.S.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, 
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 
7(b). The presence of Applicant’s father and sister in Iran is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. 
 
Iran’s hostility to the United States places a “very heavy burden of persuasion” on 
applicant to overcome the security concerns that are raised when an applicant has 
immediate family members living in Iran. See ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. 
 
8 
 
 
Aug. 4, 2006. With its adversarial stance and its poor human rights record, it is not 
unlikely that Iran would target any citizen in an attempt to gather information from the 
United States. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Neither Applicant’s father nor her sister are employed, involved in 
high technology industry, or connected to the Iranian government, Nevertheless, 
Applicant cares about her father and sister, and it is not unlikely that Iran would target 
them in an attempt to exercise indirect influence through them to gather information 
from the United States. I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s loyalty, affection, and sense of obligation toward her father and sister are 
much more than “minimal,” but her relationships and loyalties in the U.S. are strong. 
She came to the U.S. before the Iranian revolution and has never lived under the 
current Iranian regime. She has been a U.S. citizen for more than 12 years, and her 
spouse has been a U.S. citizen for more than 30 years. She has worked as a contractor 
for various federal agencies for almost 16 years. She has a sister, two nephews to 
whom she is very attached, and a granddaughter in the U.S. All of her spouse’s family 
are in the U.S. Her sister in Iran is trying to come to the U.S. When Applicant learned 
that an active Iranian passport raised security concerns, she chose not to renew it. She 
is willing to renounce her Iranian citizenship. All her property interests, which are 
considerable, are in the U.S. I am satisfied she would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
This presumption applies to Applicant’s contacts with her father and sister, and she has 
not rebutted it. I conclude Applicant has not met her burden of establishing this 
mitigating condition.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature woman who has lived all her adult life in the U.S. She 
shares the prevailing U.S. view that the Iranian government is an evil regime. She 
presented herself at the hearing as a thoughtful, intelligent woman. She was sincere, 
candid, and credible.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign and foreign preference. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
