 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.08-05046 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On August 13, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline B and Guideline C. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 20, 2008, and waived his right 
to a hearing before an administrative judge; however, Department Counsel exercised its 
right to have a hearing and on November 28, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to another 
administrative judge. On December 5, 2008, the case was re-assigned to me. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on December 16, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 15, 2009. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were received into the record without objection. Applicant testified. The record 
remained open until January 30, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
documents. On January 28, 2009, he submitted three exhibits that I marked as (AE) A 
through C, and admitted into the record without objection.  DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Russia. (Tr. 13-14) The request and the attached documents 
are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 through 9. Applicant did not object 
to my consideration of those exhibits, as relating to Russia. Hence, the facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out under the 
heading, The Russian Federation.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 20, 2008, Applicant admitted all factual 
allegations contained under Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.   
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was born and raised in a large city in Russia. He 
attended high school and college there. In February 1978, he married his wife, a 
Russian citizen resident. The following February, he earned a Master of Science in 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. He and his wife have two sons, ages 25 
and 29, both born in Russia. His wife holds an advanced degree in computer science 
that she earned from a Russian university.  
 
 In 1991, Applicant and his wife applied for visas to come to the United States. 
(Tr. 21) In July 1996, they, along with their two children, immigrated to the United States 
as Jewish refugees. (Tr. 40-41) In March 2005, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
His two children became naturalized U. S. citizens in 2003. His wife, a resident alien, 
applied for citizenship, but has not yet received it. (Tr. 27) All of his immediate family 
members live in the United States and are “Americanized.” (Tr. 41) One of his sons is 
pursuing a degree in computer science at a prestigious U.S. university, and the other 
recently completed a Master’s degree in aviation at another well-know university.  He 
immigrated because the “United States was a country of my dreams, and it was a 
symbol of freedom. I wanted to live in a country like that all my life.” (Tr. 21)   
 
 
 
 
3
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Russia and resided there until their death in 1993. (Tr. 
33) He has an older sister who was born in Russia and resides there along with her son. 
Prior to her retirement, she worked as a mechanical engineer in private industry. Her 
son is a construction contractor. Applicant loves his sister and talks or emails her and 
his nephew once every couple months. (Tr. 35; GE 2) Both of them would like to come 
to the United States, but find it difficult to obtain a Visa. (Tr. 36) Applicant’s mother-in-
law and father-in-law are deceased. (GE 1 at 23-24) He has a couple friends that he 
emails occasionally. (GE 2) 
   
 After arriving in the United States, Applicant learned English and worked in low 
level positions for five years until he was able to improve his skills and obtain a better 
position. (Tr. 22)  In May 2003, he obtained his current position in which he designs and 
implements computer networks for a federal contractor.   
 
 Applicant returned to Russia in March 2000, April-May 2004, and October 2006 
for two week vacations to visit his sister. On each visit he used his Russian passport. In 
March 2005, Applicant renewed that passport, which was issued in March 2006 and is 
valid until March 2011. He renewed it because it was easier for him to visit Russia with 
it, rather than his U.S. passport. He did not know that using it after becoming employed 
by a federal contractor could pose a problem, as he never received any briefings from 
his employer on the issue. (Tr. 52) He brought it with him to the hearing, ready to 
surrender it, and did not know he could tender it to his employer. (Tr. 49) On January 
23, 2009, he surrendered the passport to his facility security officer and is willing to have 
it destroyed. (Tr. 49; AE B) 
  
 Applicant rents his home and has about $300,000 in retirement fund. (Tr. 43) He 
also has U. S. bank accounts. (Tr. 21). He does not own any property in Russia. (Tr. 44) 
He does not have any retirement benefits there. (Tr. 50) He has not voted in any 
Russian elections since moving to the United States. (Id.) He has developed ties to his 
local community. (Tr. 44) He voted in the recent U.S. presidential election. He has no 
plans of ever permanently returning to Russia, nor do his children. (Tr. 46; 59) There is 
no derogatory information concerning his police or financial records. He has never been 
fired from a job. He has no police record other than a speeding ticket. He has never 
used illegal drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. (GE 1).  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor submitted a letter of recommendation. He has held a Top 
Secret clearance for 30 to 40 years. He met Applicant in the spring of 2003 when 
Applicant began working for their employer. The supervisor is highly complementary of 
Applicant’s work and integrity. Because of his high level of performance, the company 
requested Applicant seek a security clearance in order to assist the company in its 
support of several internal classified engineering networks. Throughout his employment, 
Applicant “has had total access to the entire [company’s] network and takes his 
responsibility for his continued security, expansion and enhancement very seriously.” 
(AE C) The supervisor has no hesitation in recommending Applicant for his clearance,  
stating that he is loyal employee, trustworthy, conscientious, and responsible. He noted 
 
 
 
 
4
that Applicant has obtained numerous industry certifications, “But none of these 
certifications mean more to [Applicant] than achieving his U.S. citizenship.” (Id.)   
 
 During the hearing, Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride of U.S. 
citizenship and desire to retain his work with his current employer. In response to a 
question about what he most likes about the United States, he stated, “I like the 
freedom and the American way of life. There is no corruption over here. . . You’ll be a 
loyal person and that’s all you need to do. You don’t need to cheat. You just work hard 
and everything comes well.” (Tr. 48) He considers himself to be an American and not a 
Russian. He is willing to renounce his Russian citizenship. (Tr. 51) He does not miss 
Russia, stating, “I am kind of ashamed of participation of Russia, and I am glad that I 
am not tied to Russia any more. And that is actually the reason I wanted to move from 
Russia to the United States because I don’t want to be part of this mess [Sic].”  (Tr. 56) 
 
The Russian Federation 
  
 The Russian Federation is a diverse and vast country. It is 1.8 times the size of 
the United States with a population of 142 million people. It achieved independence with 
the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991. (HE 1) The country is a very 
large nuclear superpower that has continued to develop economically, socially and 
politically since the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Recent events that have escalated 
tensions between Russia and the United States include the incursion into internationally 
recognized sovereign Georgia territory by the Russian army, threats against Poland, 
suspicious poisonings and killings of journalists and other persons considered to be 
undesirable, and manipulation of energy resources to pressure NATO allies and other 
U.S. friendly countries. Russia has an active, recent, and ongoing intelligence collection 
program targeting the United States. As of 2005, Russia and China were the most 
aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounted for the 
majority of such targeting. Russia has been a leader in industrial espionage against the 
United States since at least 1997, with no indication of abatement. Russia shares 
various technologies of security concern with other countries whose interests are 
contrary to those of the United States. Russian officials reportedly engage in human 
rights abuses, including abductions, torture, coerced confessions, and unlawful 
surveillance of citizens and visitors. (HE 2, 5, 7, and 9) 
 
The U.S. State Department succinctly describes the relationship between the 
United States and the Russian Federation as follows: 
 
The United States and Russia share common interests on a broad range of 
issues, including counterterrorism and the drastic reduction of our strategic arsenals. 
Russia shares our basic goal of stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and the means to deliver them.  The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) 
program, launched in 1992 to facilitate dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction 
in the former Soviet Union, was renewed in 2006 until 2013. At the 2006 G8 Summit in 
St. Petersburg, the U.S. and Russia announced the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism to keep terrorists from acquiring nuclear materials. We are working with 
 
 
 
 
5
Russia to bring Iran’s nuclear programs into compliance with International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) rules and United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1737, 
1747, and 1803. On North Korea, Russia is a participant in the Six-Party Talks aimed at 
the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Russia also takes part in the 
Middle East Peace Process “Quartet” (along with the UN and the EU). Russia now 
interacts with NATO members as an equal through the NATO-Russian Council but 
without veto power over NATO decisions. During the past several years, Russia has 
intensified its efforts to combat trafficking in persons. We are cooperating in the fight 
against HIV/AIDS. (HE 1) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
 
 
 
6
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern, two of 
which may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and,  
 
 (d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
In this case, Applicant remains in communication with his older sister and 
nephew, who are resident citizens of Russia, a country of significant concern for 
information security and espionage against the United States. He has made three visits 
to Russia since 2000 to see his sister and nephew and has his frequent contact with 
them, which demonstrate the importance of this family relationship Those connections 
are more likely to generate a heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion than 
most other countries. In addition, his wife, who resides with him, remains a citizen of 
Russia. These facts meet the Government’s burden of production by raising both of the 
aforementioned disqualifying conditions. These contacts and relationships shift the 
burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
  Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Given the nature of the Russian government and Applicant’s family’s ongoing 
presence there, a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, or coercion 
remains a concern. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s contacts with his sister 
and nephew are more than casual, such that AG ¶ 8(c) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant established application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. He has lived in the United States since arriving in 1996 as a 
refugee.  His children are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. His 
wife is a resident alien, awaiting citizenship. None of his family has any intention of 
permanently returning to Russia. He has a very good job and is involved in local 
community activities. He considers himself an American and not a Russian. He has 
bank accounts and retirement funds in the United States. In contrast, his Russian 
interests have become minimal over the years. He does not own property there and has 
 
 
 
 
8
only two family members living there. He is willing to renounce his Russian citizenship in 
favor of the United States. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:  
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, and then he or she may be prone 
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying, one of which may be applicable in this case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and, 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 
 
 
9
Applicant’s admission that he exercised dual citizenship when he chose to use 
his Russian passport to travel to Russia after becoming a U.S. citizen is sufficient to 
raise a disqualification under AG ¶ 10(a)(1).   
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline, two of which may be applicable: 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
While testifying, Applicant expressed his willingness to renounce his Russian 
citizenship, which is sufficient to trigger the application of AG ¶ 11(b). Upon learning 
how to officially surrender his Russian passport to his employer, he immediately did so, 
warranting the application of AG ¶ 11(e).  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
In cases involving foreign influence, the Appeal Board requires the whole person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given 
case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). In that same decision, the 
Appeal Board commended the whole person analysis in ISCR Case No. 03-02878 at 3 
(App. Bd. June 7, 2006), which provides: 
 
Applicant has been in the U.S. for twenty years and a naturalized citizen 
for seven. Her husband is also a naturalized citizen, and her children are 
U.S. citizens by birth. Her ties to these family members are stronger than 
her ties to family members in Taiwan. She has significant financial interest 
 
 
 
 
10
in the U.S. and none in Taiwan. She testified credibly that she takes her 
loyalty to the U.S. very seriously and would defend the interest of the U.S. 
Her supervisors and co-workers assess her as very loyal and trustworthy.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, Russia’s government is a rival of the 
United States and in some instances has not conformed to widely accepted norms of 
human rights. More importantly for security purposes, Russia is actively involved in 
espionage against the United States, and may attempt to use émigrés such as 
Applicant for espionage. Second, Applicant had numerous connections to Russia before 
coming to the United States in 1996. Following his birth, he spent his formative years 
there. He was educated at a Russian university, as was his wife. Third, his sister and 
nephew remain resident citizens of Russia. Fourth, he has some contact with his sister 
whom he loves and would like to come to the United States.  
 
There are many other countervailing, positive attributes to Applicant’s life as a 
U.S. citizen that weigh in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is a 
mature person, who has lived in the United States for 12 years, and became a U.S. 
naturalized citizen in March 2005 when he swore allegiance to the United States.  His 
spouse has been living in the United States since 1996 and is permanent alien resident, 
awaiting citizenship. His two children are U.S. naturalized citizen, whom he described 
as “Americanized.” There is no evidence he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, 
and has worked diligently for a defense contractor for several years. His supervisor 
assesses him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, and responsible, giving him an 
excellent recommendation and commenting on Applicant’s pride in being a U.S. citizen. 
He asserted his pride of American citizenship and his deep disappointment or distain for 
Russia and it policies. There is no reason to believe that he would take any action that 
could cause potential harm to his U.S. family or this country. Because his immediate 
family members live in the United States, they are not vulnerable to coercion or 
exploitation by a foreign power. The realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, 
exploitation or duress is low. Based on all of those factors and his credible and sincere 
testimony, I do not believe he would compromise national security, or otherwise comply 
with any Russian threats or coercion. No witnesses recommended denial of his security 
clearance. There is not any derogatory information about him in the record other than a 
speeding ticket.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence.2 Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
                                            
2 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security clearance. 
Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions articulated under 
AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person analysis standing 
alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
 
 
 
11
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
