1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01125
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Monte Alan Rich, Esq. 
______________
Decision
______________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on April 3, 2007.
On June 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 21, 2008 and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on October 20, 2008.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 7, 2008, for a hearing on November 21,
2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
At the hearing, the government offered five exhibits (Exhs 1-5) that were
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted one exhibit (Exh. A) that
was admitted without objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 4, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to
keep the record open for 30 days to submit additional evidence. Three additional
documents (Exhs. B - D) were submitted and accepted in evidence without objection
.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor since July 2006
working as a senior network technician. He was honorably discharged from the Army as
a private first class in 1997 after four years of active duty (Tr. 14). He had debts that
raised questions about his continued military service. He filed bankruptcy to prevent his
discharge. However, the Army revoked his security clearance because of the delinquent
financial accounts. The revocation resulted in ineligibility to do the job for which he was
trained so he left the service. The skills he learned in the Army are those that he has
used in his civilian employment since his discharge. The debts arose during his
marriage when his wife accumulated debts of which he was unaware both during the
marriage and sometime thereafter. The marriage was terminated by separation in 1997
and divorce in 2001.
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all 15 of the financial allegations relating to
approximately $13,000 in delinquent debts ranging in size from $64 to $2,700 (SOR ¶
1.a.-1.- 1.o.). They arise from medical bills, credit cards, telephone bills, and student
loans. None of the debts have been paid. One debt for $2,500 (SOR ¶ 1.g.) from an
apartment rental is in dispute (Tr. 47) but no evidence was offered to show how it was
being disputed. After his discharge from the Army, he was employed by a major telecom
corporation until 2000. He was laid off when that industry encountered financial
problems. He was largely unemployed in 2001 and 2002 except for unemployment
compensation, a few part time jobs, and withdrawals from his 401k account from his
former employer. His total income for 2002 was $22,000 (Exh. A). The current debts at
issue arose during those periods of unemployment and under-employment in 2001 and
2002 (Tr. 36). He was then living alone, so to lessen his living expenses, he lived with
his sister. 
In March, 2003 he was employed by another telecom until May, 2006. He was
unemployed for a two month period until he was hired by the predecessor corporation of
his present employer. During the three year period of this employment between 2003
and 2006 when he was not married, he managed his current income without incurring
additional debts. He also stated that he contacted creditors to attempt to resolve the
debts (Tr. 24). The holders of the larger debts insisted on lump sum payments that he
could not pay. No explanation was given for failure to resolve any of the smaller debts. 
3
Applicant’s annual salary from his present employment began at $45,000 and is
now approximately $54,000. He has a 401(k) account valued at $4,000 from which he
took a loan of $1,500 to move to the state where he now resides. He re-married in 2006.
He has three children from his first marriage and his wife has six from hers. Two of the
children and one grandchild live with them. The grandchild’s mother is serving with the
military in Iraq. While they have a large number of children, most are mature and not
living at home.
In a financial statement (Exh. 2) filed in response to interrogatories in this matter,
Applicant indicated that he had negative cash flow of $371 per month. Since he filed
that statement he has moved to another state with lower living costs and had an
increase in his salary. Thus the negative figure does not appear to be accurate although
an alternate figure was not submitted. His wife is seeking employment which, if
successful, also will have a positive effect on their income. 
At the hearing in this matter, Applicant indicated his intention to file bankruptcy
for his debts. In the post hearing submission he submitted his Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition and other related documents. He also submitted a letter from his lawyer
outlining the reasons for the filing and the advice he had received from his lawyer and a
bankruptcy counsel regarding his qualification for bankruptcy, and his decision to file
under Chapter 7 (Exhs. B - D). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
“the whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for
access to classified or sensitive information. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), "a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.” Applicant accumulated the delinquent debts cited in the SOR several
years ago and has not made payments to the creditors even though he was earning a
salary for over two years that made some payments possible. Thus, the evidence clearly
raises these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of mitigating conditions (MC) that could
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(e) the
security concern may be mitigated when the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute
the legitimacy of the past-due debt that is the cause of the problem, and provides
5
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue. He disputes one debt but provided no documentation of the
dispute. 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Most of Applicant=s financial
problems arose over six years ago but very little has been done to resolve them. Thus,
the debts are considered to be recent and ongoing. 
Under AG ¶ 20(b) the disqualifying condition could be mitigated if the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control through
loss of employment, separation or divorce, and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances. In this matter, it appears that his first group of debts during his
military service was related to his separation and divorce or at least was part of the
cause of the divorce. However those debts are not at issue in this matter. The debts at
issue here arose eight years ago during the nearly two years of unemployment and
underemployment. That could be grounds for mitigation but there is inadequate evidence
that he acted responsibly from the time he obtained employment in 2003. None of the
debts have been settled or paid during that time. No evidence was offered to show proof
of any discussions, correspondence, or negotiation with any creditor.
Evidence that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is
a potentially mitigating condition under AG & 20(c). Applicant is receiving counseling but
it is related to filing for bankruptcy which, if successful, will result in the elimination of his
debts. 
AG & 20(d) could apply if the evidence shows the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. While it not necessary that
all of the delinquent debts be resolved for mitigation to apply, it is necessary that a
significant portion of the debts be settled or paid. Since none of the debts, even two of
under $100, have been resolved or even successfully negotiated, I conclude that
mitigating conditions do not apply. 
Applicant has not been sufficiently diligent in pursuing the problem and now seeks
to resolve all the delinquent debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Even if bankruptcy is
filed or discharged, I must assess the overall history of financial problems (ISCR Case
98-0445 April 2, 1999). This bankruptcy will be Applicant’s second in the last twelve
years. While bankruptcy may place him on a sound financial footing for the future, it is
premature to grant a security clearance at this time before sufficient time has passed to
see if he can manage his finances to remain out of debt. The mitigating conditions are
not applicable.
6
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me
with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
at this time. I recognize his present expressed intent to resolve these financial issues to
keep a security clearance. However, these delinquent debts have been extant for several
years, and although he has been employed at a reasonable salary for over five years in
two jobs, none of the listed debts has been paid or settled. Applicant has not mitigated
the security concerns arising from these financial considerations. Applicant was
impressive in his testimony about his family history and work experience, there is no
reason that he should not receive a security clearance at some future time but It is
premature at this time to grant one. 
                          Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.- 1.q: Against Applicant
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Access to classified information is denied. 
CHARLES D. ABLARD  
Administrative Judge
7
