 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02736 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ayala Yasgur, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Foreign Influence and 
Foreign Preference. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on June 18, 2007. On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines C (Foreign Influence), and B (Foreign Preference) for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 19, 2008. He answered the SOR in 
writing on August 22, 2008, and elected to have his case decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing. DOHA received Applicant’s Response to SOR on August 24, 2008. 
Pursuant to the Additional Procedural Guidance of the Directive, Department Counsel 
requested that the case be converted to a hearing. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on October 8, 2008, and I received the case assignment on October 21, 
2008.  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 7, 2008, scheduling a hearing for 
December 4, 2008. The hearing was convened and completed as scheduled. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, 
without objection. I held the record open until December 15, 2008 to afford the Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional matters. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 12, 2008. On January 6, 2009, Applicant submitted AE B 
and AE C, which were received without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of the certain facts relating to Taiwan. The request, which contained a country 
summary, and accompanying documents, were marked as GE 3 through 17 and 
received without objection. (Tr. 9, 12-14).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Taiwan were derived from GE 3 through 17 as indicated under subheading “Taiwan” of 
this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old systems engineer, who has been employed by his 
defense contractor employer since June 2007. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan in December 1951, where he was raised and spent 
his formative years. He attended college/graduate school in Taiwan and was awarded a 
Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry in May 1974, and a Master’s Degree in 
chemistry in June 1976. Tr. 60. He served two years of mandatory military service in the 
Taiwanese Army from 1976 to 1978 as a junior officer assigned to instructor duty 
teaching physics and mathematics. Tr. 23-25, 61-62. He pursued his graduate studies 
in the U.S., and was awarded a Ph.D. in chemistry instrumentation in March 1987, 
discussed infra. Tr. 60-61. 
 
Applicant married his wife in December 1979 in Taiwan. Applicant’s wife, like 
him, was born and spent her formative years in Taiwan. GE 1. In August 1982, 
Applicant immigrated to the U.S. on a student visa to attend graduate school for his 
Ph.D., discussed supra. Tr. 56. Applicant’s wife and oldest son joined him later in the 
U.S. Applicant’s oldest son was born in Taiwan in October 1982. Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1999. He was issued a U.S. passport in October 
2003. Applicant’s wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1988, and his oldest 
son became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 1999. Applicant’s second son was born 
in the U.S. in April 1989, and is a U.S. citizen by birth. GE 1. 
 
Applicant’s wife is employed as a secretary. Together, Applicant and his wife 
make a comfortable six figure income. Tr. 69-80. Applicant’s oldest son is employed at a 
bank and currently lives with Applicant and his wife. Applicant’s other son is a 
sophomore attending a prestigious university in the U.S. Tr. 53-54. 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Taiwan, and that he 
held a valid Taiwanese passport after being issued his U.S. passport (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.c.). 
In November 2008, Applicant surrendered his Taiwanese passport to the Taiwanese 
government. He also applied for “expatriation” with the Taiwanese government 
renouncing his Taiwanese citizenship. In December 2008, the Taiwanese government 
issued him a “Certificate of Renunciation of Nationality” thus approving his request. Tr. 
57-59, AE A – AE C. 
 
Applicant has four living siblings in Taiwan, two sisters, ages 63 and 60, and two 
brothers, ages 52 and 50. His 63-year-old sister is a retired teacher, his 60-year-old 
sister is retired from a factory, his 52-year-old brother is a physician, and his 50-year-old 
brother is a dentist. He has one sister who is deceased (SOR ¶ 2.a.). Tr. 29-37, 65-66. 
Applicant speaks to his 63-year-old sister by telephone “about every three months” and 
speaks to his other siblings by telephone “every six months to one year.” Tr. 66-67. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is 80 years old and lives in Taiwan (SOR ¶ 2.b.). Tr. 68. None 
of his siblings or relatives are associated with or employed by the Taiwanese 
government. Tr. 39. 
 
Applicant visited Taiwan three times since he immigrated to the U.S. in 1984. 
The first visit was for eight days during December 2003/January 2004 for a family visit. 
The second and third visits were in 2006. The second visit was in October following his 
father’s stroke and the third visit was a month later in November to attend his father’s 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
funeral. The latter two visits lasted approximately one week each (SOR ¶¶ 1.e.-1.f.). GE 
2, Tr. 63-65. Applicant used his Taiwanese passport when he traveled to Taiwan in 
2003 and 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e.). As noted supra, Applicant surrendered his Taiwanese 
passport to the Taiwanese government in November 2008. 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant owned an apartment in Taiwan valued at 
approximately $150,000 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. 1.f.). During the hearing, the “official” value of the 
apartment was established at about $300,000, which is divided among the six remaining 
children and/or their heirs. Applicant’s oldest sister pays taxes on that apartment. 
Applicant is unsure about his inheritance status in light of his having given up his 
Taiwanese passport and citizenship. Other than his uncertain interest in the apartment 
his father left to his six children, Applicant does not have any real or personal property 
in Taiwan. Tr. 45-47. 
 
Applicant and his wife own their home valued at approximately $350,000 free 
and clear. He has a 401(k) account valued at $300,000 and approximately $30,000 
cash in the bank, with a total net worth of $630,000. Tr. 62-63. 
 
Taiwan1 
 
In 1949, two million refugees fled from a civil war in mainland China to Taiwan. 
That same year, Communists in mainland China established the Peoples’ Republic of 
China (PRC or China), and Chiang Kai-shek established a separate, provisional capital 
for his government in Taipei, Taiwan. The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s 
independence, and insists that there is only “one China.” After long recognizing Taiwan, 
on January 1, 1979, the U.S. formally recognized the government of the PRC as the 
sole legal government of China. The U.S. does not support independence for Taiwan 
and is committed to a “one-China policy,” under the Taiwan Relations Act, signed into 
law on April 10, 1979.  
 
 Taiwan is a multi-party democracy that has significant economic contacts with 
China, and it has developed a strong economy since its separation from the PRC in 
1949. However, Taiwan’s own national security remains under constant threat from the 
PRC and this has led to Taiwan’s large military establishment. The PRC’s Ministry of 
State Security is the “preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwan connections.  
 
 Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, and the 
National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC)’s 2000 Annual Report to Congress on 
Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists Taiwan as being among the 
most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information. The 2000 Report 
highlights specific incidents wherein Taiwan engaged in attempts to acquire export-
restricted products.  
1 The contents of the Taiwan section are taken in whole or in part from GE 3 through 17. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 These collection activities are ongoing, as evidenced by the January 2006 
conviction and four-year prison sentence of Jonathan C. Sanders on charges related to 
the theft of sensitive and proprietary information by and for Taiwanese companies.   
Additionally, in December 2005, Donald Keyser, the Principal Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, pled guilty to illegally removing 
classified materials and to providing false statements to the U.S. Government.  Mr. 
Keyser was engaged in a relationship with, and met with, an intelligence officer 
employed by the National Intelligence Bureau, the foreign intelligence agency of the 
government of Taiwan.  
 
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security or trustworthiness suitability, an 
administrative judge must consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information” (AG(s)). The AGs include brief 
introductory explanations for each AG, and provide specific disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 These Guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines 
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. AG ¶ 2. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
 Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AGs ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
  
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified [or sensitive] information 
will be resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts by “substantial evidence,”2 demonstrating, in accordance 
with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue an applicant’s access to classified information. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant 
to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person seeking access to classified or sensitive information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. It is 
because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to such 
information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of such 
information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism.  Executive Order 10865, § 7.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the Government’s concern: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
2 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
3“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
7 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 sets out the following conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country. 
 
 At the time the SOR was issued, Applicant held dual citizenship with Taiwan and 
the U.S., and held a valid Taiwanese passport because it was his belief that he was 
required to demonstrate he was a Taiwanese citizen in order to inherit property from his 
father. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) has been raised by the evidence.  
 
 Three Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 11 are potentially 
mitigating to this disqualifying condition: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant’s dual citizenship was derived from his parents and/or residence in 
Taiwan. Applicant exceeded the requirement to express a willingness to renounce his 
dual citizenship by formally renouncing his Taiwanese citizenship as well as 
surrendering his Taiwanese passport to the Taiwanese government in November 2008. 
Confirmation of this was acknowledged by the Taiwanese government in December 
2008. He took such action being uncertain of the collateral affects it would have on his 
inheritance rights, desiring to comply with DoD requirements for a security clearance. 
This concern is deemed mitigated under AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(b), and 11(e). 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
 
8 
 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contact with his older sister and to a lesser extent his remaining siblings in Taiwan. 
These close relationships create a potential risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion meriting a close examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions as a result of Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. The 
Government established Applicant’s siblings are resident citizens of Taiwan, and that 
Applicant maintains frequent contact with them by telephone and infrequent travel. The 
 
9 
 
 
Government also identified the concerns associated with Applicant’s potential 
inheritance of his father’s apartment in Taiwan. The burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
 Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and/or obligation to his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for/and or 
obligation to siblings by telephone as well as his travel to Taiwan in 2003 and 2006.  
 
Applicant’s siblings are not associated with or affiliated with the Taiwanese 
government. His two sisters are retired and his two brothers are respectively employed 
as a physician and a dentist. The record does not identify what influence, if any, the 
Taiwanese government could exert on Applicant’s siblings as a result of their being 
resident citizens of Taiwan. However, their presence in Taiwan and Applicant’s foreign 
travel create concerns under this Guideline. As such, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
show his relatives in Taiwan and travel there does not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Taiwan,” Taiwan actively engages in intelligence 
gathering against the U.S.  
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one.  
 
[Guideline B] hinges not on what choice Applicant might make if he is 
forced to choose between his loyalty to his family and the United States, 
but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he is forced to make such a choice. ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). 
 
On balance, Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationship with his in-laws] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” The nature of the Taiwan’s government and its ongoing intelligence 
gathering activities against the U.S. places Applicant in just this position, given his close 
relationship with his family and their continued presence and connection with Taiwan. 
Accordingly, Mitigating Conditions 8(a) and 8(b) do not apply. On the other hand, the 
affirmative steps Applicant has taken by renouncing his Taiwanese citizenship and 
surrendering his Taiwanese passport to Taiwanese authorities may preclude him from 
inheriting property from his parents. When compared with having no assets in Taiwan 
and having little or no likelihood of acquiring property in Taiwan through inheritance and 
his substantial assets in the U.S., application of Mitigating Condition 8(f) is appropriate 
for SOR ¶ 2.c. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”4 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve 
misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the 
eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.5 In addition to the 
4 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
11 
 
 
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.    
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to Taiwan. Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole 
person analysis. First, and most importantly for security purposes, Taiwan actively 
seeks classified and industrial/economic information. Taiwan may attempt to use 
Applicant’s siblings who live in Taiwan to obtain such information. Also, Applicant spent 
his formative years in Taiwan. Applicant has visited Taiwan three times recently, i.e. one 
time in 2003 and two times in 2006. Applicant also maintains frequent contact with his 
older sister and to a lesser extent his remaining siblings in Taiwan. These contacts and 
visits are manifestations of strong affection and regard Applicant has for family 
members in Taiwan.    
  
There is substantial mitigating evidence that weighs towards grant of Applicant’s 
security clearance. Applicant immigrated to the U.S. in 1987 to pursue his graduate 
studies, and has continuously lived in the U.S. for the past 22 years. His wife and oldest 
son became U.S. citizens, and his youngest son was born in the U.S. His assets in the 
U.S. are substantial when contrasted to his uncertain assets in Taiwan. He is a U.S. 
citizen and U.S. passport holder. His ties to the United States are stronger than his ties 
to his siblings in Taiwan. He has vested his life and future in the U.S. There is no 
evidence Applicant has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the 
United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and he has 
worked diligently for a Government contractor since June 2007. The evidence contains 
no derogatory record evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan. Taiwan is a multi-
party democracy. In the unlikely event that Applicant’s family in Taiwan was subjected 
to coercion or duress from the Taiwanese government in an attempt to obtain sensitive 
information, I find that because of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S., that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress in favor of the United States. Noteworthy is the affirmative and 
overt steps Applicant recently took to formally renounce his Taiwanese citizenship and 
surrender his Taiwanese passport to the Taiwanese government, at the risk of negating 
his inheritance rights. 
  
This case must be adjudged on his own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
analysis. This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that the Taiwanese government or its agents might exploit or 
attempt to exploit Applicant’s family members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would 
have to choose between his pledged loyalty to the U.S. and those family members. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence and preference.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”6 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
                  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.d.: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
