                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03512
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 9, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On July 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 26, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 10, 2008. Applicant did not file
a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2008. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 65 year old employee of a defense contractor.
SOR Allegation 1.a: Applicant is indebted to the State of California in the
approximate amount of $1,012.00 as evidenced by a State tax lien filed against him in
1996 (Exhibit 7). As of September 2008, this lien was still in place (Exhibit 8).
SOR Allegation 1.b: Applicant is indebted to the State of California in the
approximate amount of $8,164.00 as evidenced by a State tax lien filed against him in
1995 (Exhibit 7). As of September 2008, this lien was still in place (Exhibit 8).
SOR Allegation 1.c: Applicant was indebted to the IRS in the approximate
amount of $4,854.00. Because the only evidence of this debt was a tax lien filed against
him in 1994, and Exhibit 7 indicates the lien was released in 2003, I find applicant is no
longer indebted to the IRS.
SOR Allegation 1.d: Applicant admits he is indebted to Applied Credit Bank in
the approximate amount of $2,835.00. This credit card debt has been delinquent since
at least 2002, and was placed for collection. In his response to the SOR, applicant
stated he is “presently negotiating with them for a final settlement.”
SOR Allegation 1.e: Applicant was indebted to Providian on an account that
went delinquent and was placed for collection with Palisades Collection in the
approximate amount of $4,500.00. Applicant settled the debt for $2,375.00 and made
the $2,375.00 payment in August 2008.
SOR Allegation 1.f: Applicant is indebted to Verizon Wireless on an account that
went delinquent and was referred to Pinnacle Credit for collection in the approximate
amount of $1,364.00.
SOR Allegation 1.g: Applicant was indebted to AT&T on an account that went
delinquent and was turned over to NCO Financial for collection in the approximate
amount of $455.00. In his response to the SOR, applicant stated “the AT&T bill has
been paid in full, for the original amount, documentation included.” He attached a copy
of a receipt from AT&T, dated August 26, 2008, which shows a payment of $385.62.
Although this appears to be the original amount of the debt, there is no evidence that
AT&T accepted this payment as payment in full.
In Exhibit 6, applicant provided a number of reasons for his financial
delinquencies. He claims the tax liens were the result of incorrect tax forms being filed
by others. He claims he does not owe the taxes, and will not pay them. (He didn’t offer
an explanation for the release of the IRS lien). He also stated that his financial problems
were caused by a break up with his girlfriend, two major vehicle accidents, problems
with the freight hauling business, and an illness, which caused him to lose “a lot of time
in the office.” 
3
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
4
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a history of conduct
indicating an inability or unwillingness to pay his debts.  Accordingly, these disqualifying
conditions are applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph 20.a. may apply
where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s financial difficulties are
recent and ongoing. The evidence he offered is insufficient to establish he is unlikely to
experience further financial delinquencies. This mitigation condition is not applicable.
Under Paragraph 20.b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
provided numerous reasons for his financial problems. However, he failed to offer
sufficient details to permit a finding that these reasons were the primary factors behind
his numerous financial delinquencies, or that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances. This mitigating condition is not applicable.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph 20.c. The problem is not under control, as
evidenced by applicant’s inability or unwillingness to address the State tax debts and
the Verizon debt, and to reach an agreement with Applied Credit Bank on repaying this
six year old debt. This mitigating condition is not applicable.
Paragraph 20.d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant
satisfied the Providian debt, and either satisfied or made a substantial payment on the
AT&T debt. These are factors in his favor. However, given the facts that (1) these
payments were made after he received the SOR, (2) he has not made any payment to
or payment arrangements with Applied Credit Bank or Verizon Wireless, and (3) he has
not provided credible evidence that he has recently tried to resolve his tax debts, he has
not “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
This mitigating condition is not applicable.
Paragraph 20.e. applies when “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue.” This mitigating condition does not apply because, although
applicant may have a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of his tax debts, he
provided no documentation to substantiate his position.
5
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2.c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who fell
behind on numerous debts many years ago, and some of these debts are still
outstanding. Applicant claims his tax debts are not legitimate and some of his other
financial delinquencies were caused by factors beyond his control. Although possibly
true, the evidence he offered to support these claims; namely, uncorroborated written
statements, is insufficient to establish their validity. Had applicant requested a hearing
instead of a decision based on the written record, he may have been able to offer
additional evidence clarifying some matters (e.g., why the IRS lien was released; how
exactly his break up, accidents, and illness impacted his income) which - together with
his written statements - may have been sufficient to mitigate the Government’s case.
But applicant did not request a hearing, and based on the limited evidence in the record,
I have no choice but to conclude applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns
arising from Guideline F.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
