 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05669 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on January 18, 2008. On October 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On November 4, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
determination be made in his case without a hearing.  On December 29, 2008, 
Department Counsel prepared a File Of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant on that same date. Applicant received the FORM on January 5, 
2009. He had thirty days from the receipt of the FORM to submit additional matters. He 
timely submitted additional matters. On January 15, 2009, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
indicated that they had no objection to the additional matters. The case was assigned to 
me on January 21, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 22-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to update his security clearance.  He is a systems administrator and has 
worked for his current employer since October 2007. He has a high school diploma and 
an associate of applied science degree. This is his first time applying for a security 
clearance. He is single and has no children. (Item 3)   
 
Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was 16-years-old. The extent of 
Applicant’s alcohol use was a few beers or a mixed drink. He drank alcohol at parties 
which occurred approximately every two weeks. He rarely drinks to intoxication. He still 
drinks alcohol occasionally at certain social events. (Item 4 at 8) 
 
On September 10, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Intoxicated. He was visiting his girlfriend who was a college student. He was driving her 
back to her dormitory after attending a party. He had drank a few alcoholic drinks. He 
drove through a Virginia State Police checkpoint. The police officer smelled alcohol on 
his breath. Applicant was required to take a field sobriety test which he failed. A 
breathalyzer test revealed a BAC of .12. He pled guilty to an amended charge of Driving 
After Illegally Consuming Alcohol. He was ordered to pay a fine and court costs, his 
license was suspended for six months, and he was ordered to attend alcohol education 
classes.  He completed the terms of his sentence. (Item 3, question 23; Item 4 at 7; Item 
5) 
  
In October 2005, Applicant received a citation for underage possession of 
alcohol. He was at a party at a friend’s house. The neighbors called the police due to 
the noise. Applicant subsequently appeared in court, and was ordered to pay a fine and 
court costs. (Item 3, question 23; Item 4 at 3-4)  
 
 On October 8, 2005, Applicant was caught shoplifting a $50 pair of earrings from 
a department store. He was charged with petit larceny and given a citation. He pled 
guilty and was ordered to pay a fine, court costs, and rehabilitation classes. (Item 3, 
question 23; Item 4 at 5-6; Item 6)  
 
Applicant started to use marijuana in June 2004, at age 18. From June 2004 to 
June 2007, he used marijuana on at least ten occasions.  He used marijuana with 
friends and at parties. Applicant sold marijuana during the time period that he used 
marijuana (June 2004 to June 2007). He purchased the marijuana from mutual friends 
or acquaintances and resold the marijuana to other acquaintances. He would not 
provide the names of the people from whom he purchased or to whom he sold 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana. The extent of Applicant’s involvement in the purchasing and selling of 
marijuana is unknown. He claims his marijuana use had no impact on his work, school 
work, or family life. He stopped using marijuana in June 2007 because he “grew up.” 
(Item 3, question 24; Item 4 at 9)  
 
In July 2003, Applicant used cocaine on three occasions. He used cocaine with 
some of his high school friends at a party. He snorted a line of cocaine on each 
occasion that he used cocaine. (Item 3, question 24; Item 4 at 10) 
 
In June 2003, Applicant used psilocybin, otherwise known as hallucinogenic 
mushrooms, on approximately three occasions. The first time he used was with some 
friends while attending a rock concert.  He used hallucinogenic mushrooms once when 
he was alone. (Item 3, question 24; Item 4 at 10-11)  
 
Marijuana, cocaine, and psilocybin are considered illegal drugs in the United 
States. (Item 10; Item 11; Item 12)  
 
Applicant does not think his illegal drug use or his alcohol use have caused him 
any problems. His mother is aware of the full extent of his drug and alcohol use. He 
does not intend to use illegal drugs again. (Item 4; Applicant’s Response to FORM, 
undated, received by DOHA, January 15, 2009)  
   
In his response to the FORM, Applicant states September 2005 through 
December 2005 was a difficult time for him. He learned to be an adult during that 
period. He learned that it is not worth risking his future to drink and drive or to shoplift. 
He no longer drinks and drives. He understands it is a responsibility to drink. The 
shoplifting offense was a one-time incident and he knows that he made a mistake. He 
knew when he used marijuana, cocaine and psilocybin that they were illegal and 
dangerous. He claims that his use was experimental and he did not abuse drugs. He 
does not intend to use illegal drugs again. He has an amazing opportunity in his current 
job. He understands that obtaining and maintaining a security clearance will mean more 
responsibility. He believes he is ready for the opportunity. While his past mistakes do 
not make him a perfect candidate for a security clearance, he believes he has grown 
from his mistakes. (Applicant’s Response to FORM) 
 
Applicant was a teller at a local bank. The senior vice president of the bank has 
worked with Applicant over the past three years. She describes him as “a very fine 
young man of the utmost honesty and compassion.” She states he has contributed a lot 
to making the bank a success.  The assistant branch manager of the bank has worked 
with Applicant since April 2004. She states that Applicant was promoted to information 
technology assistant with the company because of his superior performance. The vice 
president of information technology has worked with Applicant in various capacities over 
the past three years. Applicant has worked directly for him for the past two years. 
Applicant demonstrates an eagerness and ability to learn new things. He shows a 
maturity and focus well beyond others in his age group. He highly recommends 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant for any position or endeavor he may seek to pursue. (Applicant’s Response to 
FORM, attached reference letters) 
 
Applicant’s mother manages a gas station. Applicant worked for her at the gas 
station from June 1997 to August 2004. She states that Applicant works well with 
others. He was a natural at customer service and problem solving. He has excellent 
character and the natural ability to learn and adapt to changing environments. 
(Applicant’s Response to FORM, attached reference letters) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG &21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions (AC DC) 
apply: 
 
AC DC &22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent) applies because Applicant was charged with alcohol-
related offenses on two separate occasions. He was arrested for DWI on September 10, 
2005. He was cited for underage possession of alcohol in October 2005.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) ¶23(a) (so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. More than three years 
have passed since Applicant was charged with the alcohol offenses. He has completed 
all of his court-ordered duties. His current level of alcohol use does not raise issues 
pertaining to his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. He is of legal age to drink 
alcohol and understands the gravity involved with drinking and driving.   
 
Applicant’s current level of alcohol use no longer raises a security concern. 
Guideline G is found for Applicant. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled 
Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, 
narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar 
substances. AG ¶24(a). 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction. AG ¶24(b). 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DI DC) &25(a) (any drug 
abuse) and DI DC ¶25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) apply 
to Applicant’s case. Applicant admits to illegally using marijuana on at least ten 
occasions between June 2004 and June 2007. He illegally used cocaine and psilocybin 
on several occasions in the summer of 2003. He admits to purchasing and selling 
marijuana to other individuals over a three year period. 
 
Since Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the government produced 
substantial evidence by way of exhibits to raise disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15). An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. 
(See, ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (DOHA Appeal Board Decision, September 22, 
2005)  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following have the potential to apply to 
Applciant’s case: 
 
Drug Involvement Mitigating Condition (DI MC) ¶26(a) (the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment) 
 
 
7 
 
 
DI MC &26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding 
the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.)  
 
While Applicant states that he has matured and no longer uses illegal drugs, his 
last use occurred less than two years ago, just six months prior to the submission of his  
application for a security clearance. Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred over a period 
of several years. He used three different illegal drugs (i.e. marijuana, cocaine, and 
psilocybin) on numerous occasions.  His drug use cannot be considered experimental. 
While it has been several years since he last used cocaine and psilocybin, he last used 
marijuana in June 2007.  His marijuana involvement is further aggravated by the fact he 
purchased and sold marijuana to other individuals. The record is unclear as to the 
extent that Applicant purchased and sold marijuana. The record is unclear as to whether 
Applicant still socializes with the acquaintances with whom he purchased, sold and 
used illegal drugs.   
 
None of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement apply. Applicant has 
the burden to mitigate the concerns raised under drug involvement. He has not met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under drug involvement because 
Applicant’s use of illegal drugs occurred on numerous occasions over a five year period. 
He not only used illegal drugs but also purchased and sold marijuana. Considering the 
extent of his illegal drug use and that his last use of illegal drugs occurred less than two 
years ago, there is insufficient evidence in the record to mitigate the concerns raised 
under drug involvement. Guideline H is found against Applicant.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in 
¶30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply with respect to 
Applicant’s three arrests in 2005 for Driving While Intoxicated, Underage Possession of 
Alcohol, and Petit Larceny.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, 
or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)  
 
CC MC ¶32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) 
 
While Applicant has not been arrested since 2005 and has completed the terms 
of his court-ordered sentences, his criminal behavior continued until June 2007. By his 
own admission, Applicant purchased, used and sold marijuana up until that time. The 
purchase, sale and use of marijuana is illegal. The criminal conduct is not diminished  
because Applicant was never arrested. While Department Counsel did not cross allege 
this conduct under criminal conduct, it is conduct that can be evaluated when 
considering mitigation of the criminal conduct concern.  
 
More than three years have passed since Applicant’s last criminal charge 
occurred. However, Applicant stopped using, purchasing and selling illegal drugs less 
than two years ago. Not enough information was provided about the extent of 
Applicant’s involvement with the illegal purchase and sale of marijuana to conclude this 
is no longer an issue. While several of these offenses were minor, Applicant committed 
numerous criminal offenses over a five-year period. There is not enough information in 
the record to conclude Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct concern. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide information 
 
9 
 
 
pertaining to his work performance in his current job, but I considered the favorable 
statements from his co-workers at his former places of employment. Applicant’s recent 
alcohol use no longer raises a concern under alcohol involvement. The alcohol 
consumption concerns are mitigated. However, Applicant did not mitigate the security 
concerns raised under drug involvement and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
