                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00707 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Franciso Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines G and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 26, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 22, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 2, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on February 18, 2009. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) that 
were marked AE 1 through 7. Department Counsel had no objections and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 23, 2009.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR on January 22, 2009, by withdrawing 
allegations 2.a, 2.b and 2.e of the SOR, and adding the following allegation under 
paragraph 2:  
 
 2.g. That information set forth under paragraph 1, above.  
 
Applicant acknowledged the amendment and circled the response that referred to the 
answer he previously provided.  
 
 At the hearing I renumbered the allegations in paragraph 2 of the SOR in 
sequential order, reflecting the withdrawals and addition. Subparagraph 2.c is now 2.a; 
2.d is now 2.b; 2.f is now 2.c; and 2.g which was added is now 2.d.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. 
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 
1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and denies the remaining allegations. In addition, after a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old and works as an information systems security officer for 
a federal contractor. He was married in 1999 and divorced in 2004. He has an 11-year-
old son from a prior relationship. After years of a custody dispute he was awarded full 
custody of his son in April 2007. Applicant is a high school graduate and has earned 
some college credits. He also earned different certifications as an information specialist. 
Applicant served in the Marine Corps from 1994 to 1999 and was honorably 
discharged.1  
 
Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he consumed alcohol, at times 
to excess and to the point of intoxication from 1993 to June 2007. At his hearing he 
testified that after 2005 he reduced his consumption of alcohol and has not been 
intoxicated since then. He now drinks one to three times a week; usually it is a drink 
with dinner.2  
 
 
 
1 Tr. 140-142. 
 
2 Tr. 79-80. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
In 1993 Applicant was charged with Minor in Possession of Alcohol. He paid a 
fine.3 
 
In 1994 Applicant was charged with Public Intoxication of a Minor. The charge 
was dismissed.4  
 
In September 1998 Applicant was charged with Driving Under the Influence of 
Alcohol (DUI) and Driving While Having a Measurable Blood Alcohol in his system. He 
pled guilty to a reduced charge of Reckless Driving. He was sentenced to three years 
probation. At the time he was in the Marine Corps and after this arrest he was 
specifically ordered not to drink and drive and not to let this happen again.5 Applicant 
went to an Article 15 Non-Judicial Punishment Hearing under the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ) in December 1998 for unauthorized absence and DUI. He 
received a reduction in rank, restriction, extra duties, and forfeitures.6  
 
In November 1998 Applicant was charged with DUI, Driving with a Blood Alcohol 
of .08% Alcohol, and Driving with a Suspended License DUI. He was found guilty and 
was sentenced to 10 days of community service in lieu of confinement, five years 
probation; attend an 18-month Multiple Conviction Program, revocation of his driver’s 
license for a year, and fines and fees totaling approximately $2,500. Applicant explained 
that this offense occurred the day after his grandfather died.7  
 
Applicant received Non-Judicial Punishment from the Marine Corps in 1999 for 
offenses related to his November 1998 DUI charges. Specifically he was charged under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) at an Article 15 Hearing with Failure to 
Report to Appointed Place of Duty, Failure to Obey a Lawful Order, and Wrongfully 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of Alcohol. He was ordered to be reduced in 
rank, forfeiture of pay, and restriction. Applicant acknowledged that there is a standing 
order in the Marine Corps not to drink and drive. Applicant was also directly ordered, 
after his September 1998 DUI, not to drink and drive, which is the basis for the orders 
violation. His Failure to Report to Duty was because he was being held by the police on 
the DUI charge.  
 
Applicant was attended alcohol counseling through the Marine Corps after this 
incident. He also attended court ordered alcohol treatment and counseling through the 
state from November 1998 to June 2000. He completed the required alcohol programs.8  
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Tr. 84-86. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 89; AE 6. 
 
8 Tr. 86-88. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant made a sworn statement on May 20, 2004. He references “DUI 98.” He 
does not mention the September 1998 Reckless Driving conviction. Applicant explained 
“I was drinking beer for a good part of the afternoon and evening when I then decided to 
stop drinking so that I could take a friend home. I stopped for about 2 hours and thought 
that I was ok[ay] to drive.” He was stopped by a police office while at a stop light 
because he threw a cigarette out of the window. He was pulled over and given a 
breathalyzer and blew a .08%. He further stated: “I have no future intentions o[f] driving 
while under the influence.”9 
 
In 2004 Applicant was at a bar when a fight occurred outside. There were 
approximately 11 to 13 men assaulting one man. Applicant knew some of the men were 
Marines and attempted to break up the fight. Applicant had been drinking alcohol. The 
police were called and Applicant was arrested along with others. Applicant stated that 
during the fight he noticed that a ceramic “dolphin” figurine fell on the ground. He picked 
it up and put it in his pocket for safe keeping. After his arrest, he was searched and it 
was determined the “dolphin” was a marijuana pipe. Applicant was charged with Public 
Swearing/Intoxication, Disorderly Conduct, and Possession of Marijuana. Appellant 
entered into a plea bargain. The plea deal consisted of the case being Nolle Prosequi in 
June 2005.10 Applicant stated:  
 
So I was told that if I did the nolle prosequi that it would go off my record in 
a year, and that I could have this expunged, and my attorney at the time 
basically told me that this was not a concern to my clearance, because I 
asked him. I’ve always been concerned about-I always want to do the right 
thing. So I asked is this going to affect my clearance. And he said, no, this 
shouldn’t. We are going to get it expunged. It goes off your record.11  
 
 In October 2005 Applicant was drinking alcohol with friends. He and his friends 
moved their activities to another friend’s place. He had more drinks while there and it 
was about 2:00 to 3:00 a.m. He knew he had to drive home so he stopped drinking for a 
couple of hours and went home about 5:00 a.m. While driving home Applicant had a 
one vehicle accident and his vehicle ended up on its side in the ditch facing the wrong 
direction. When the police arrived he was arrested and charged with DUI. He was 
convicted and sentenced to 60 days, which was suspended, a fine, ordered to attend 
alcohol awareness education, and probation. Applicant testified he successfully 
completed the terms of his sentence. He attended and completed a 10-week court 
ordered alcohol treatment program as was required. He did not attend Alcoholics 
Anonymous because he considered his latest DUI to be an isolated incident. His driver’s 
license was suspended, but has been reinstated since 2006.12  
 
 
9 GE 5. 
 
10 Tr. 70-73, 91-105. 
 
11 Tr. 73-111. 
 
12 GE 8. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant believes his alcohol-related incidents relate to his private life. Applicant 
attempted to gauge how much he had to drink before he would drive. He would try and 
limit his consumption to approximately one alcoholic beverage an hour before driving.13 
Applicant referred to his September 1998 and November 1998 DUI’s as isolated 
incidents with alcohol.  
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on February 28, 
2001.14 In response to question 24 which asked if he had ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs, he divulged the November 1998 
DUI conviction. He did not divulge his September 1998 arrest and charge of DUI, which 
was later reduced to Reckless Driving, for which he was convicted. Applicant admitted 
he was drunk when he was arrested in September 1998. He admitted he was driving 
under the influence of alcohol at the time of this arrest.15 In his answer to SOR, he 
stated:  
 
I did not list the 9/98 incident because I was convicted of a Reckless 
Driving not an alcohol related conviction. Since going through this periodic 
reinvestigation I’ve learned from the Security Investigators that I probably 
should have listed the charges and explained the outcome even though I 
thought I was correct in only listing the conviction because the question 
asks, “Have you ever been charged with OR convicted of any offense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs?” [T]herefore since the question used “or” I 
didn’t list this non-alcohol related conviction.16 
 
Applicant testified he made a mistake when he did not list the September 1998 
Reckless Driving conviction, or he was not paying attention to detail, but he did not 
intentionally fail to report the offense. 
 
Applicant responded “no” to question 26 in his 2001 SCA, which asked him if in 
the last seven years he had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any 
offense(s) not already listed.  
 
Question 25 asked if he had been subject to court martial or other disciplinary 
proceedings under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) in the past seven years. 
Applicant listed that he went to an Article 15 UCMJ Hearing on December 15, 1998. He 
listed he was charged with disobeying an order. He listed no other offenses or any 
additional Article 15 Hearings.17 In addition to the orders violation, he was also charged 
 
 
13 Tr. 81-83, 88-91, 123-127. 
 
14 GE 3. 
 
15 Tr. 113. 
 
16 Answer to SOR; Tr. 117-121. 
 
17 GE 3. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
with unauthorized absence and operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol. 
All of these offenses occurred on September 2, 1998. Applicant failed to divulge these 
offenses. He also failed to divulge he went to a second Article 15 Hearing on July 1, 
1999, for failing to report to his appointed place of duty on November 12, 1998; failing to 
obey a lawful order issued by the Squadron Executive Officer; and wrongfully operating 
a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.18  
 
Nowhere on his SCA application did Applicant divulge the September 1998 DUI 
charge and subsequent conviction of Reckless Driving. Applicant stated he made an 
honest mistake and does not know why he left out the Reckless Driving charge. This is 
inconsistent with the systematic way the charge was not divulged in answering any of 
the questions where it would have been appropriate. I find Applicant intentionally and 
deliberately failed to divulge his Reckless Driving conviction. He was aware that he was 
originally charged with an alcohol-related incident in September 1998 and was ordered 
by his Marine supervisors not to drink and drive after the incident. His attempt to explain 
away why he did not list this offense under question 24 might be reasonable if he had 
listed in under question 26, which he did not.  
 
 Applicant completed another SCA on September 9, 2003. In response to 
question 24 requesting information about any alcohol or drug related arrests, charges or 
convictions, Applicant only listed the November 1998 DUI conviction. In response to 
question 25 requesting information about any court martial or other disciplinary 
proceedings, he answered “no.” In response to question 26, asking if he had been 
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense not already listed, he answered 
“no.” In this SCA Applicant continued to be dishonest. He again only listed his 
November 1998 DUI conviction and not his September 1998 Reckless Driving 
conviction or either of his Article 15 hearings.19 His explanation was that he merely 
copied his answers from his 2001 SCA. He also believed the question was “out of 
scope”. His explanation is not credible because he failed to provide the same answers. 
Applicant testified he made a mistake by failing to list the above mentioned required 
information on his 2001 and 2003 SCA. I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately 
failed to divulge the required information.20 
 
Applicant stated he contacted his attorney to see if had to divulge the 2004 
marijuana/disorderly conduct/public intoxication swearing arrest before he completed 
his SCA in 2007. He stated his attorney told him the charge was not on his record and 
was expunged. He asked his attorney if the Nolle Prosequi would affect his security 
clearance and he testified the attorney told him it would not. Applicant did not disclose 
this arrest on his 2007 SCA. He stated he did not think he had to disclose it and he was 
following the advice of his attorney. I do not find Applicant’s testimony credible. 
 
 
18 GE 2.  
 
19 GE 4. 
 
20 Tr. 128-135. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Question 23(d) states: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “yes” but only listed his 2005 DUI 
conviction. He did not list his 1998 DUI conviction or his 1998 Reckless Driving 
conviction, or any of his other alcohol-related arrests. 21 He also did not list his arrest for 
marijuana possession/disorderly conduct/public swearing. Although he stated he was 
following the advice of his attorney for why he did not list this arrest, I find his 
explanation inconsistent because he failed to list his 1998 DUI and his 1998 Reckless 
Driving convictions. He also answered “no” to question 23(f) which asked if he had been 
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed. He clearly was 
aware he was arrested and charged with the 2004 drug and disorderly conduct 
offenses, even if the ultimate disposition was Nolle Prosequi. Applicant has exhibited a 
continuing course of deception beginning with his 2001 SCA continuing through his 
2007 SCA.   
 
 Applicant provided documents with his answer to the SOR and additional 
documents at his hearing regarding his Marine Corps service. Also included were a 
psychological evaluation, an alcohol treatment certificate, and character statements that 
were considered. Those providing character statements expressed that Applicant is 
considered a model employee and has many admirable personal and professional 
characteristics. His work ethic, discipline, and motivation are exceptional. He is 
considered a dedicated professional and a person of integrity. He was recommended 
for a position of trust.22  
 
 Two witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. A former office director of 
Applicant noted he is very thorough and is attentive to detail. He trusts Applicant and 
has confidence in his character and judgment. He has seen him mature and grow 
intellectually and considers him a man of integrity.23  
 
 A former supervisor testified on behalf of Applicant. He considers Applicant to be 
very professional, hard working, and trustworthy. Applicant has worked in positions of 
trust in the past and has always been compliant with security guidelines. Applicant told 
his supervisor about his 2004 arrest for marijuana possession shortly after it occurred. 
The supervisor would recommend Applicant for a position of trust. 24 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
21 Id. 
 
22 AE 1-7. 
 
23 Tr. 30-40. 
 
24 Tr. 49-69. 
 
8 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant has numerous alcohol-related incidents beginning as a minor in 1993. 
He has three alcohol-related convictions, one a reduced charge to Reckless Driving and 
two DUI convictions, in 1998 and 2005. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. 
 
 I have considered Applicant’s testimony that since his 2005 DUI conviction that 
he has reduced his consumption of alcohol. He is now the custodial parent of his son 
and has focused his attention on being a good father. It has been more than three years 
since his last alcohol-related offense. I am somewhat concerned that Applicant attempts 
to gauge his consumption of alcohol and then attempts to drive. His estimations have 
been inaccurate and resulted in his last arrest. However, under the circumstances it 
appears Applicant has changed his lifestyle and with now having the responsibility as a 
full-time parent, I find enough time has passed and further alcohol-related incidents are 
unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶ 23 (a) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which , if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
Applicant deliberately failed to divulge his 1998 Reckless Driving conviction on 
his 2001 and 2003 SCA. I did not find his explanations credible.25 Applicant consistently 
and deliberately failed to divulge important required and requested information. I am 
concerned that Applicant repeatedly attempted to hide damaging information from the 
government that was required to conduct a background investigation. His testimony was 
not believable.  
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct related to alcohol beginning in 1993. 
He was arrested six times for alcohol-related offenses. Two of his alcohol-related 
offenses occurred within two months of each other. He has attended alcohol education. 
He was on probation for five years after his first DUI conviction and was on probation for 
a year after his 2005 DUI conviction. Applicant’s personal conduct and his attempts to 
conceal it are causes of concern. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct under AG ¶ 17. I have especially considered 
the following: 
25 I have not considered Applicant’s other omissions for disqualifying purposes, but did consider 
them when making a credibility determination and evaluating the “whole person.” 
 
11 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significant contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant did not make an effort to correct the omissions and falsifications on his 
2001 or 2003 SCA before being confronted. His actions can not be considered minor 
because he failed to divulge information that was pertinent to his security clearance 
investigation thereby casting doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. 
Applicant has a history of questionable personal conduct. He has been arrested 
numerous times and has two DUI convictions and an alcohol-related Reckless Driving 
conviction. He was on probation twice, attended alcohol awareness classes. Applicant 
continues to believe that these were isolated incidents. He has demonstrated a pattern 
of misconduct and does not seem to grasp its significance. I do not find sufficient 
evidence has been presented to convince me he has taken action to reduce his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Based on all of the evidence I find 
none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
12 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant has a good work record and is considered a very good employee. His 
character witnesses and references believe he has matured and grown. He actively 
pursued obtaining custodial custody of his son who now lives with him. Applicant has a 
history of alcohol-related offenses. It appears at this time that he is focusing on being a 
good father and has minimized his consumption. He has not had an alcohol-related 
incident since his last DUI conviction in 2005. Applicant had two alcohol-related 
incidents in a two-month period in 1998, both DUIs, but one was reduced to Reckless 
Driving. He failed to divulge all of his misconduct as was required. I find these were not 
oversights or simple mistakes, but rather were deliberate omissions with intent to 
mislead the government. Applicant has established a pattern of rules violations. I have 
considered the totality of the events and circumstances and conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
