 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05612 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robin Szmansky, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 5, 2006. On 
October 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 14, 2008; answered it on November 3, 
2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on November 6, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 26, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on December 4, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on December 29, 2008, scheduling the hearing for January 
14, 2009. On January 9, 2009, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing, changing 
the hearing date from January 14 to January 13. I convened the hearing as 
rescheduled, with Applicant’s agreement (Tr. 23). Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 
7 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted AX D through H, which were admitted without objection (Hearing Exhibit I). 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 27, 2009. The record closed on January 
30, 2009. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 On my own motion, and without objection from either party, I amended the SOR 
to correctly reflect Applicant’s middle name (Tr. 35). The amendment is handwritten on 
the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old construction superintendent for a federal contractor. 
He has a high school education and has worked for his current employer since March 
1995. He received a security clearance and eligibility for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) in March 2003.  
 
 Applicant was married in September 1980 and divorced in June 1989. He 
remarried in May 2002 and was divorced in May 2003. He remarried his second wife in 
October 2004 and they were again divorced in March 2005. He has two daughters, 
ages 27 and 12. He pays child support for his 12-year-old daughter and is current on his 
payments (Tr. 38). 
 
 From about 1988 to 2000, Applicant owned a concrete business. Due in large 
part to his inexperience in running a business, he accumulated substantial delinquent 
federal taxes. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) records reflect that in April 1996 he failed 
to file a return; and in May 1997, he was assessed a penalty for underpayment of 
estimated tax and filing late. He did not keep records of expenses and could not support 
deductions from income. As of December 2000, he owed $145,180 in taxes, $51,707 in 
accrued interest, and $15,755 in accrued penalties (GX 7 at 1).  
 
In 1997, Applicant negotiated a payment plan with the IRS, providing for monthly 
payments of $100 until 2007, and he complied with that agreement (Tr. 43-44; GX 7 at 
1; AX F at 3). A federal tax lien was filed against him in November 2003 for $141,072 
(Enclosure 6 to GX 2; GX 3 at 2). The lien was released on October 30, 2008 (AX B). 
 
3 
 
 
The release recites that Applicant “has satisfied the taxes listed below and all statutory 
additions.” 
 
 Applicant placed a fraud alert on his credit record after suspecting that his ex-
wife had incurred debts in his name (AX C, Personal Profile at 1). He disputed several 
debts on his credit bureau report (CBR) and the debts were deleted (CBR attached to 
answer to SOR).  
 
 The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.k, and 1.j arose when Applicant 
received several surgical treatments on his neck in 2002. He testified he verified before 
the surgery that the treatments were covered by his company insurance plan, but 
coverage was denied after he received the treatments on the ground that his condition 
was pre-existing (Tr. 58-60). He disputed the debts, but all dialog has been telephonic 
and not in writing (Tr. 76). He attempted to obtain written documentation of his 
preapproval for the surgery, but his medical records were destroyed after six years (AX 
E at 1). However, he produced an invoice from his doctor for treatment in August 2002, 
reflecting $17,775 to be covered by insurance and $900 to be paid by Applicant (AX E 
at 2). The invoice shows that his doctor believed the treatment would be covered by 
insurance. Applicant’s general manager testified that local doctors routinely verify that 
treatment is preapproved because they want to make sure they will be paid (Tr. 90-91). 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Creditor Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Federal Tax 
Lien 
$141,000 Lien released AX B 
1.b Medical 
 
$45 Paid AX G at 2 
1.c Medical 
 
$57 Paid AX H; Tr. 48 
1.d Satellite TV $311 Disputed; removed from CBR CBR attached to 
answer 
1.e Cell phone $1,453 Disputed; removed from CBR CBR attached to 
answer 
1.f Furniture $4,435 Disputed; removed from CBR CBR attached to 
answer 
1.g Gas credit 
card 
$85 Disputed Tr. 56 
1.h Medical $507 Insurance coverage denied; 
disputed 
Tr. 58-60; AX E 
1.i Medical $1,963 Insurance coverage denied; 
disputed 
Tr. 58-60; AX E 
1.j Medical 
 
$220 Insurance coverage denied; 
disputed 
Tr. 58-60; AX E 
1.k Collection $311 Same as 1.d Tr. 51 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s most recent CBR dated January 13, 2009, still reflects the furniture 
debt that he successfully disputed and a collection account that Applicant believes is 
related to the disputed medical bills (AX C, Account History at 1, 3).1 Based on 
Applicant’s testimony and the documentation submitted in his answer to the SOR, I am 
satisfied that he has successfully disputed the furniture debt in SOR ¶ 1.f, and that the 
medical debt in this CBR is related to the disputed medical debts in SOR ¶ 1.h-1.j. 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) in response to DOHA 
interrogatories on July 28, 2008. It reflects net monthly income of about $4,417, 
expenses of $2,235, debt payments of $1,745, and a net remainder of $486 (GX 2 at 4). 
He testified he recently received a pay raise that increased his net monthly income to 
about $5,200 (Tr. 63), but the expenses and debt payments remained unchanged, 
increasing his net monthly remainder to about $1,300. The PFS does not reflect any 
payments on the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant testified he is current on all his 
obligations, including child support.  
 
 The physical security officer at one of the military agencies supported by 
Applicant’s company has known Applicant for 11 years and worked closely with him. He 
describes Applicant as trustworthy, reliable, and conscientious (AX A). The general 
manager and facility security officer for Applicant’s employer testified he is in charge of 
construction at all the company’s facilities, responsible for large sums of money, and 
responsible for security training and enforcement at the various worksites. She testified 
Applicant is trustworthy and has her full confidence (Tr. 83-84).  
 
 Applicant’s general manager is certified to practice in IRS cases. She assisted 
Applicant in resolving his tax issues and gathering documentation regarding the 
disputed medical bills (Tr. 85-86; 93-94). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
                                                          
1  Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to allege the delinquent debts reflected in the CBR 
dated January 13, 2009, but he withdrew his motion when Applicant objected to the amendment (Tr. 69-
72). 
 
5 
 
 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a federal tax lien for $141,000 (SOR ¶ 1.a); five delinquent 
medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j); a delinquent satellite TV bill (SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.k)); a cell phone bill (SOR ¶ 1.e); a debt for furniture (SOR ¶ 1.f), and a 
gasoline credit card bill (SOR ¶ 1.g). In his answer to the SOR, Applicant responded, “I 
accept,” to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g, but stated he did not know the identity 
 
6 
 
 
of the creditor and did not know if the debts had already been paid. He denied the 
remaining allegations in the SOR. I have treated his answer as denying all the 
allegations.   
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@ 
Applicant financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by his failure 
to file a return in 1996. The evidence reflects that Applicant filed returns in subsequent 
years but either filed late or underpaid his taxes.  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems may be mitigated if Athe behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound mitigating 
condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established 
because Applicant’s debts are numerous. Some debts were satisfied only recently, and 
others are disputed and not yet resolved.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The third prong (“unlikely to recur”), however, is established for the federal tax 
lien, the disputed medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.j, and the fraudulent debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d-1.g. Applicant learned he was not competent to operate his own business and is not 
likely to make that mistake again. The disputed medical debts arose because Applicant 
was informed that his surgical treatments were preapproved, but coverage was denied 
after the fact on the ground that his condition was pre-existing. He is now more attuned 
to the importance of monitoring his credit record, and he has placed a fraud alert on his 
credit record. 
 
The final prong (“does not cast doubt”) is established. Applicant acted 
responsibly and resolved the tax debt. Like many citizens, he did not realize the 
importance of monitoring his credit record until his background investigation revealed 
the derogatory information in his CBR. He responded by resolving the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.c and disputing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g. His financial situation is under 
control. Based on the evidence supporting the third and fourth prongs of AG ¶ 20(a), I 
conclude this mitigating condition is established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
The tax lien was not due to conditions beyond his control, but rather conditions 
beyond his competence. His medical condition requiring treatment was beyond his 
control, and his failure to pay the disputed medical bills was due to the insurance 
company’s denial of coverage after he was preapproved for the treatment, also beyond 
his control. The debts due to fraud were beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly 
by resolving the tax debt, paying undisputed medical debts, disputing the fraudulent 
debts, and challenging the insurance company’s denial of coverage. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(b) is applicable. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). 
Applicant’s general manager is experienced in IRS cases. She assisted him in resolving 
his tax debt, and it is now resolved. I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) applies to the federal tax debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a; but it does not apply to mitigate the overall financial concern 
because he has not received financial counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting “in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). “[A]n applicant is not required, as a matter 
 
8 
 
 
of law, to establish that [he/she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR . . . 
All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [he/she] has . . . established a 
plan to resolve [his/her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.” ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). 
 
Applicant has satisfied the federal tax lien, paid the undisputed medical bills, 
disputed the fraudulent debts, and disputed the medical debts for which insurance 
coverage was denied. The amounts of the disputed medical debts are within his ability 
to pay if the dispute is resolved against him. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed three medical debts for which insurance coverage was denied. He was unable 
to provide documentation that his treatment was preapproved, because his medical 
records were destroyed after six years. He did, however, provide documentary evidence 
that his doctor believed the treatment was covered by insurance. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) 
is established for the disputed debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.k. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked for the same federal contractor since 
1995, held a clearance for more almost six years, and is regarded as a trustworthy and 
valuable employee. Like many citizens, he learned the hard way about the importance 
of monitoring his credit record. He has resolved his tax problems and acted responsibly 
 
9 
 
 
about the other debts listed in the SOR. His personal financial situation is under control. 
His current income leaves him a substantial net monthly remainder. If the disputed 
medical debts are resolved against him, he has the financial resources to pay them.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
