                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01041
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 24, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On July 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 9, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 19, 2008. Applicant did not file
a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2008. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In August 1997, and again in March 1998, applicant was arrested and charged
with Alcohol Possession by a Person Under 21. On both occasions he pleaded nolo
contendere and adjudication was withheld.
In November 1997, applicant was charged with Driving While Drivers License
Suspended. He was found guilty.
In March 1999, applicant was arrested and charged with three crimes involving
the sale of drugs (felony), evidence tampering (felony), and resisting an officer without
violence (misdemeanor). Adjudication was withheld for six months, during which time
applicant was on probation. If applicant had served his probation without incident, the
charges would have been dismissed. However, the charges were not dismissed
because applicant violated the terms of his probation when he was arrested in August
1999 (discussed below). 
In August 1999, applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of a
Controlled Substance Without a Prescription, a felony. He pleaded nolo contendere,
was placed on probation for three years, and was ordered to pay court costs. He
violated the terms of this probation when he was arrested in 2000 (discussed below).
In 2000, applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While Drivers License
Suspended/Cancelled/Revoked. He was found guilty. Based on the guilty finding and
his probation violation, he was sentenced to home confinement for six months.
In September 2003, applicant was arrested and charged with DUI Alcohol or
Drugs 1  Offense. In October 2003, he was found guilty, fined, placed on probation forst
12 months, and ordered to attend DUI school.
In September 2006, applicant was arrested and charged with Resist Officer-
Obstructions W/O Violence. In October 2006, he pleaded no contest, adjudication was
withheld, he was placed on probation for 6 months, and he was ordered to pay court
costs.
During an interview with an OPM investigator in September 2007, applicant
stated that his criminal conduct was the result of associating with the wrong people. He
further stated that he has not used drugs since 1999, and no longer associates with
drug users.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
3
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 31.c., “allegation or admission of
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted” may be disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 31.e., “violation of
parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program” may
be disqualifying. Applicant’s multiple criminal convictions, multiple crimes for which there
4
was no formal conviction because adjudication was withheld, and his two violations of
probation, raise these disqualifying conditions.
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. Under Paragraph 32.a., it may be mitigating if “so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under Paragraph 32.d., it may be
mitigating if “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.” Applicant’s last criminal conduct occurred about two years ago, which is a
positive sign. However, because he twice went more than two years between crimes
during his period of criminal activity between 1997 and 2006, these two years, by
themselves, do not support a finding that his criminal activity will not recur. This fact,
together with applicant’s failure to offer any positive evidence of reform and
rehabilitation from independent sources who know him well (e.g., family, friends,
coworkers, supervisors), preclude application of either mitigating condition.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was a relatively young
man when his criminal activity began, but it continued well into his twenties. He
voluntarily engaged in this conduct, which occurred over a period of about ten years.
Applicant’s “clean” record during the last two years is a positive sign, as is his statement
that he no longer associates with drug users. But, in the absence of any credible
independent evidence that suggests he is unlikely to engage in criminal conduct or
exercise such poor judgment in the future, this evidence is insufficient to support a
finding that his criminal conduct and poor judgment are unlikely to recur. Accordingly,
applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J.
5
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
