 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00349 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dana D. Jacobson, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2008. Applicant 
was working overseas, and was not scheduled to return to the United States until the 
last week of December 2008. After coordinating with Department Counsel and 
Applicant’s counsel, DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 19, 2008, and the 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on January 6, 2009. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were received without objections. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and submitted Exhibit (AE) A, which was received without objection. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted six pages of documents, which were marked AE B through F, and 
admitted without objections. Department Counsel’s memos are marked Hearing Exhibits 
(HE) I and II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He served in the U.S. Army from 1974 until he retired 
as a warrant officer in 1996. He has an MBA degree. He was married to the same 
woman for 26 years, until they divorced in 2002. Applicant and his first wife remarried in 
2004. That marriage ended in divorce in 2006. He married his current wife in 2006. He 
has three adult children from his first marriage and an infant child with his current wife.1  
 
 Applicant and his former wife had financial problems in the 1980s. She was also 
in the Army, but was discharged for passing nonsufficient funds (NSF) checks. She was 
unemployed and had a difficult time finding work. They filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
1988. He was unable to maintain the payments to the trustee. The bankruptcy court 
permitted the case to be converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His dischargeable debts 
were discharged on January 5, 1989.2  
 
 Applicant continued to have financial issues after the bankruptcy. He and his wife 
went through a number of separations and then finally decided to go through with a 
divorce. The separation agreement called for her to receive their house, and she would 
maintain the mortgage payments. Their divorce was final in October 2002. She received 
the house but did not keep up the payments on the mortgage. She planned to file for 
bankruptcy. He decided that if she filed bankruptcy and he did not, he would be solely 
responsible for all their debts.3  
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on August 1, 2002. Under 
Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured Claims, he listed a mortgage and two equity 
loans on his house totaling $209,222, and a car loan with a balance of $13,198. 
Schedule F – Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, listed 18 debts, totaling 
$67,428. He retained the car and reaffirmed the car loan. He filed that he would 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22, 25, 31-32, 35-36, 44, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
3 Tr. at 25-31. 
 
 
3 
 
surrender the house. The mortgage company filed a motion with the bankruptcy court to 
permit the company to proceed with foreclosure. The bankruptcy court permitted the 
foreclosure to proceed, and the house was lost to foreclosure. There is no deficiency 
owed on the mortgage. Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged on November 
23, 2002.4 
 
 Applicant’s employment was sporadic. He had periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. He again fell behind on a mortgage, and lost his house to 
foreclosure in February 2007. There is no deficiency owed on the mortgage. His car 
was also repossessed. The financial institution reported in July 2007, that the amount 
due on the loan was $10,601, minus $3,500 obtained for the car at auction, plus $948 in 
attorneys’ fees, for a balance of $8,050. Applicant settled this debt in full on January 26, 
2009, for $2,895.5 
 
 The only other delinquent debt alleged in the SOR is a $20 debt to a collection 
company, collecting on behalf of a cable provider. The March 9, 2008 credit report listed 
the original amount of the debt at $283, and a balance of $20. Applicant disputed owing 
the debt, but paid the creditor to resolve the debt. The debt is listed on the December 9, 
2008 credit report with a zero balance.6 
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling from a credit counseling company. He also 
sought advice from financial planners. He obtained a job with a defense contractor in 
about June 2007. He was deployed to Kuwait and Afghanistan in support of defense 
contracts from about August 2007 through December 2008. Applicant was able to put 
his finances in order and save money while he was deployed. He has no delinquent 
debts, and he estimated that he has about $45,000 to $50,000 in his 401(k), cash, and 
certificates of deposit (CDs), with about $30,000 of that amount in cash and CDs.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5.  
 
5 Tr. at 33-39, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6-9; AE C, E, F.  
 
6 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7, 8; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 39-43, 49-51, 54-57; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems go back more than 20 years, and he only recently 
paid the last remaining delinquent debt. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. He attributed his 
financial problems to his former wife’s actions and employment issues. These are 
conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully applicable, there must be a 
correlation between the unforeseen circumstances and the person’s financial problems. 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant handled his financial issues by filing bankruptcy in 1988 and 2002. That is an 
acceptable legal option to address one’s burdensome debts. However, Applicant does 
 
6 
 
not receive full credit under either AG ¶¶ 20(b) or 20(d) for resolving his old debts 
through bankruptcy.8 To address his recent delinquent debts, Applicant obtained a job 
with a defense contactor, and spent much of the last year and a half in Kuwait and 
Afghanistan. He built up a reserve of cash and other assets, and paid off all his 
delinquent debts. He acted responsibly by making a good-faith effort to repay his 
overdue debts acquired since his last bankruptcy. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are applicable 
to his recent financial issues.  
 
Applicant received financial counseling from a credit counseling company, and 
advice from financial planners. He is now financially solvent, with a reserve of available 
assets. All his delinquent debts have been paid. His financial problems have been 
resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No.  99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
this country in the U.S. Army, and I also considered his deployments to Kuwait and 
Afghanistan as a defense contractor. His finances had been in disarray for a number of 
years. However, he was able to save a substantial amount while he was deployed, and 
he paid his remaining delinquent debts. His financial house is now in order.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
