                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-03397
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
 February 18, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On July 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines B, C and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 27, 2008, applicant answered the SOR in writing, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 26, 2008. Applicant did not
submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
This passport will expire in 2010.
1
It is not clear if the relatives to whom he refers are his in-laws.
2
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant was born in Turkey. At some point he moved to the United States. He
earned two degrees from an American university. He became a United States citizen
and was issued a United States passport in 2002.
Applicant’s wife, to whom he has been married since 2002, was born in Turkey
and is a naturalized United States citizen. She, like applicant, considers herself a dual
citizen of Turkey and the United States.
Applicant’s mother-in-law and siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Turkey.
In his response to the SOR, applicant described his relationship with them as “merely
personal and based on being related through my wife.”
Prior to becoming a United States citizen, applicant possessed a Turkish
passport. He renewed this passport in 2005,  after he had become a United States1
citizen and obtained a United States passport. Applicant used the Turkish passport to
travel to Turkey in 2001, 2002 and 2003. In response to interrogatories sent to him by
DOHA, applicant stated, “I am not willing to destroy, surrender, or invalidate [the Turkish
passport] at this time. I do still have relatives in Turkey whom I visit occasionally and
require my Turkish passport to travel within Turkey.”2
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) in February 2007. In response to Question 17.d., which asked: “In the last
seven years, have you had an active passport that was issued by a foreign
government?” applicant stated “no.” Applicant denies he intentionally provided the false
answer. In his response to the SOR, he stated, “I DENY that I deliberately failed to
disclose my possession of an active foreign passport because I interpreted the question
as to inquiring if I had ever been issued a passport by a foreign country in the last 7
years to which the answer is ‘No’ since my Turkish passport had been issued in . . .
1995 which is outside the window of 7 years.” This explanation is not credible. It is
simply unbelievable that a man of applicant’s intelligence could have misinterpreted the
question as he claims he did.
The Government offered four official United States publications with the FORM
that provide relevant facts about Turkey. The Government requested that these
documents be admitted into evidence. I have admitted the documents into evidence,
and I take administrative notice of the following facts found therein:
Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multi-party parliamentary system and a
president with limited powers. It has a population of about 70.5 million and is a member
3
of NATO. United States-Turkish relations focus on areas such as strategic energy
cooperation, trade and investment, security ties, regional stability, and the global war on
terrorism. 
Terrorist bombings over the past five years have stuck religious, government,
government-owned, political, tourist and business targets in a number of locations in
Turkey. A variety of leftist or Islamic terrorist groups have targeted U.S. and Western
interest as well. Terrorists claiming association with al-Qa’ida were responsible for
suicide bombings in Istanbul in 2003 that targeted Western interests. In August 2005,
Turkish police uncovered a planned terrorist attack by a transnational group targeting
maritime interests in Turkey. The possibility of terrorist attacks, both transnational and
indigenous, remains high.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
 
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information.
4
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern relating to the Foreign Influence guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 6 of the AG, and is as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
Paragraph 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.b., “connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information” may be
disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 7.i., “conduct, especially while traveling outside the
U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by
a foreign person, group, government, or country” may be disqualifying.
Applicant has in-laws who are citizens and residents of Turkey. “As a matter of
common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 04-11577 (App. Bd. Feb. 6, 2007). Applicant’s statement that
his relationship with his in-laws is “merely personal and based on being related through
my wife” is insufficient to rebut the presumption that he has ties of affection and
obligation to his in-laws. This fact alone creates a potential conflict of interest and
requires application of the first disqualifying condition. Applicant has traveled to Turkey
at least three times since 2000, and intends to travel there in the future to visit his
relatives. When applicant is in Turkey, he is potentially vulnerable to exploitation,
pressure, or coercion by the Turkish government. These facts require application of the
second disqualifying condition.
Paragraph 8 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Under
Paragraph 8.a., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can demonstrate that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.” Under Paragraph 8.b., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
5
demonstrate “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual*s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” Lastly, under Paragraph 8.c., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
demonstrate that the “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.” Because the evidence reveals little to nothing about applicant’s contacts,
relationships, and sense of loyalty or obligation to his in-laws, none of the foregoing
mitigating conditions is applicable.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
The security concern relating to the Foreign Preference guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 9 of the AG, and is as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
Paragraph 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 10 a.1., exercising any right or privilege of foreign
citizenship after becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a
family member may be disqualifying. Applicant possessed and used a Turkish passport
after becoming a United States citizen. Accordingly, this disqualifying condition applies.
 
Paragraph 11 describes potentially mitigating conditions. Under Paragraph 11.c.,
it may be mitigating if the “dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth
in a foreign country.”  Because applicant’s Turkish citizenship is based on his birth in
Turkey, this mitigating condition applies.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
6
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable.
I considered the potentially mitigating conditions under this Guideline and
conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph 2.a:
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2.c., the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Applicant was born in Turkey. He subsequently moved to the United States,
attended college, and became a United States citizen in 2002. After he became a
United States citizen, he voluntarily renewed his Turkish passport, and used it to travel
to Turkey. Applicant’s dual citizenship, possession and use of his Turkish passport after
he became a United States citizen, intention to use his Turkish passport for future travel
to Turkey, failure to disclose his possession of the Turkish passport on the e-QIP, and
failure to provide details about his contacts and relationships with his Turkish in-laws,
preclude a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for applicant to
have access to classified information.
Although I have considered the fact that Turkey and the United States are allies,
this fact is not determinative. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting
and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is
not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570
at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  It is a known fact that friendly nations and allies have
engaged in espionage against the United States.
7
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
