1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-06581
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 9,
2007. On September 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 24, 2008. He
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
December 5, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 13, 2009, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 2, 2009. The government offered
Exhibits (Ex.) 1-2, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own
behalf and presented the testimony of three witnesses. He submitted Exhibits (AE) A-C
2
which were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
on February 10, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.d of the SOR. He also admitted the allegation in ¶ 2.a. He provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1983 and attended some college classes in 1884. He is twice divorced
and remarried in 2004. He has four children and eight grandchildren. He has worked in
a professional capacity in the project design field for his entire career. He has been with
his current employer for 16 years (GE 1).
Applicant has suffered from bipolar disorder since he was a child. The disorder
did not manifest itself until approximately 1998. Applicant was going through a divorce
at the time. During counseling, it was suggested that he might have bipolar disorder. He
sought medical guidance and was put on the drug lithium. He cycles between manic
and depressive phases every month. He is diagnosed as Bipolar II (AE C). He takes
various prescribed medications (Tr. 14).
Applicant is a highly creative designer working on projects for defense
contractors. About five years ago, he was feeling very stressed with the projects at
work. He was experiencing side effects from some of the medications. He was highly
agitated and believed he could not function in a calm manner. He felt anxious and had
panic attacks. At that time, he spoke to his psychiatrist, and after reading literature in
the area, he decided to try smoking marijuana to alleviate some of the great stress that
he was experiencing. The marijuana did alleviate the symptoms (Tr. 15).
One medication that Applicant uses causes anxiety and the other prescribed
medication to alleviate that side effect increases a rapid cycling in his disorder.
Applicant stressed that using marijuana is not the best solution for his problem but it is a
solution for him. It allows him to relax. The prescribed medication (Lorazapam) for high
anxiety leaves him with adverse side effects (Tr. 33).
Applicant uses marijuana in his home. After work if he feels anxious and wants to
relax, he will smoke marijuana. His wife sometimes uses it as well. His wife provides the
marijuana and Applicant does not know her source.  At the hearing, Applicant explained
he still uses marijuana. His last use was two days before the hearing. He was candid in
his remarks that he will continue to use it. However, he acknowledged that it is not the
appropriate way to handle the situation. Applicant wants to find a “substitute legal
medication” to help him manage his disorder rather than use marijuana.
3
Applicant’s employer described Applicant as a very trustworthy individual. He has
personally known Applicant since 2002. He believes Applicant is a good father, husband
and good person. He is aware of Applicant’s condition and his use of marijuana. He
socializes with Applicant and his wife. His employer has never seen any negative effects
from Applicant’s bipolar condition. He stated it would be helpful for the company if
Applicant received a security clearance (Tr. 41). He recommends Applicant for a
security clearance.
Applicant’s project manager testified in Applicant’s behalf. He explained that
Applicant approached him after he completed his security application and advised him
that he was using marijuana for his bipolar condition. His project manager initially had
concerns and discussed them with Applicant. The project manager complimented
Applicant on his technical expertise as well as his effectiveness with clients and other
department heads in the company. Applicant has a good relationship with customers,
architects, design teams, and his colleagues (Tr. 49). He praises him as trustworthy and
recommends Applicant for a security clearance.
Applicant’s step-son describes him as a good person. His step-son has four
young children and often allows them to spend time with Applicant at the family home.
He knows that Applicant uses marijuana but has not seen any use. He also works in the
same company with Applicant and has no reservations about him professionally or
personally.
Applicant’s employer has a drug policy for its employees (Tr. 35). The company
has random drug testing. Applicant discussed his marijuana use with his direct
supervisor. Applicant answered “yes” to section 24 on his security clearance application
(illegal drug use) and noted in detail his bipolar condition and his use of marijuana (GE
1). Applicant also described his marijuana use in his June 2008 interrogatories (Ge 2).
At the hearing, Applicant explained that his psychiatrist knows of his marijuana
use but has not prescribed it for Applicant (Tr. 22). His doctor sees him on a regular
basis and monitors his medications (Depakote, Lexapro, and Lamicile). Applicant’s
physician does not believe that Applicant’s bipolar disorder impairs his judgment or
would affect his ability to hold a security clearance (Tr. 30).
Applicant’s evaluations are excellent. He receives the high ratings in all areas.
His leadership and key role in implementation of projects is highlighted. He is
passionate about his work and has a wide range of talents and abilities. (AE B).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
  
5
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 25(a), Aany drug abuse@ is potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia” is also potentially disqualifying.
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana every other day from October 2005 through
June 2008. 
Under AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance”
is a disqualifying condition. Applicant used marijuana after submitting his security
clearance application in 2007. He also expressed his intent to continue using the illegal
drug. Under AG ¶ 25(h) “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use” is a disqualifying condition.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
use of marijuana is ongoing. He was candid at the hearing that he will continue to use it
to help manage his bipolar condition. I do not find that this mitigating condition applies.  
Under AG ¶ 26(b), it may be mitigating where there is Aa demonstrated intent not
to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.” This is not a factor for consideration in this
case for the reasons discussed above.
The Bond Amendment, 50 USC Section 435b, prohibits all Federal agencies from
granting or renewing a security clearance for any person who is an unlawful user of a
controlled substance or is an addict. The Department of Defense (DoD) issued interim
guidance defining an unlawful user of a controlled substance as a “person who uses a
controlled substance and has lost the power of self-control with reference is the use of
6
the controlled substance, and any person who is a current user of the controlled
substance in a manner other than as prescribed by a licensed physician.” Such use in
not limited to the use of drugs on a particular day, or within a matter of days or weeks
before, rather that the unlawful use has occurred recently enough to indicate that the
individual is actively engaged in such conduct. An “addict” of a controlled substance is
defined as “an individual who habitually uses any narcotic drug so as to endanger the
public morals, health, safety, or welfare; or is so far addicted to the use of narcotic drugs
as to have lost the power of self-control with reference to his addiction. (Memorandum,
Subject: Interim Guidance for the Implementation of Public Law 110-181, Section 3002
(the Bond Amendment) Regarding Adjudication of Security Clearances, date June 20,
2008).
In this case, Applicant could be an “unlawful user”. It is not clear if he has lost the
power of self-control of marijuana since he sees it as a means to resolve his bipolar
anxiety. He wants a legal means to relieve the anxiety but he did not present
information to carry his burden of proving that he is not an unlawful user. His efforts to
find a legal means are not sufficient and could indicate his lack of self-control as to
marijuana.
Applicant is at least an “addict” in that he habitually uses marijuana and his use
can endanger public morals, health, safety, or welfare, even though he only uses at
home the marijuana supplied by his wife. 
Under the Bond Amendment, Applicant is an unlawful user or addict and has not
met his burden of proof in this case. He did not present sufficient information to mitigate
the application of the Amendment and is barred from a security clearance for those
reasons.
Under AG ¶ 26(b), it may be mitigating where Aa demonstrated intent not to
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.” This is not a factor for consideration in this
case for the reasons discussed above.
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
7
Under the guideline, AG ¶ 16, describes conditions that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying. Applicant disclosed his use of marijuana on his
security clearance application. He explained that he used it to reduce anxiety and
eliminate side effects of his prescription drugs on his security questionnaire. He
answered his June 2008 interrogatories in detail and explained the frequency of use. He
did not fail to provide any truthful answers not attempt to deceive the Government. He
believes his limited use of the illegal drug does is consistent with his respectable and
stable family lifestyle. He has spoken to his employer concerning the use. He also
spoke to his psychiatrist about the use of marijuana. However, he does not have a
prescription for marijuana. He clearly intends to continue the illegal use of marijuana
due to his bipolar condition. His behavior and personal conduct are disqualifying as they
raise questions about his judgment and reliability and a willingness to comply with the
law. 
After considering the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, I find that none of
them apply in this case.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2©, the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that they are not
sufficient to overcome the government’s case. Applicant is a mature, well-educated
professional. He served in a professional capacity for his entire career. He is an
exemplary employee and has been with his employer for 16 years. He is highly
recommended for a security clearance.
Applicant was candid and forthright at the hearing. He suffers from a bipolar
disorder that causes him anxiety. He takes prescribed medication for this disorder.
However, he uses marijuana now to help ease the side effects of his multitude of
prescribed medications and to calm him. He uses marijuana at home with his wife. He
does not deny or dispute the government’s concern. His continued use of marijuana,
8
regardless of the motivation for the use, is prohibited by law. In addition, under the Bond
Amendment, Applicant is precluded from a security clearance if he is a current user. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all the
reasons discussed above, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his drug involvement and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
