                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00619
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: B. Daniel Lynch, Attorney At Law
February 4, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire For National Security Positions on August
22, 2004.  On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on October 2, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on October 22, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on October 30, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for December 11, 2008.  At the hearing the Government
presented four exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 to 4.  The Applicant called
one witness, presented two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and B, and
testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on
December 22, 2008, to allow the Applicant to submit additional documentation.
Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit consisting of seven pages, referred to as
Post-Hearing Exhibit A.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on January 5, 2009.
2
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political conditions in Kuwait.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 23).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 52 years of age and married.  He is
employed as an Aircraft Electronic Technician for a defense contractor.  He seeks a
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Kuwait City, Kuwait in 1956, and speaks English and
Arabic.  In 1974, after graduating from high school, at the age of eighteen, he needed a
job and voluntarily joined the Kuwaiti Air Force.  A year later, in 1975, during an
international assignment, he came to the United States on a student visa while serving
in the Kuwaiti Air Force.  (Tr. p. 42).  He finished the assignment in 1978, and returned
to Kuwait.  That next year, he was released from his military obligations and decided to
return to the United States on a visitor’s visa.  In December 1978, while visiting the
United States, he met his wife, a native born American citizen.  They got married in
January 1979, and eventually had two native born American children.  At that point, the
Applicant decided to make the United States his permanent home.      
Since 1982, but for a short break in service, the Applicant has worked for his
current employer in the defense industry.  In 1984, he became a United States citizen.
Beginning in 1988, he has held Secret and Top Secret security clearances for many
years.  He has never violated any security policies or procedures in protecting classified
information.  He has never received any violations or infractions of any sort.  Since
1978, he has never returned to Kuwait for any reason. 
The Applicant has a number of family members who reside in Kuwait.  His only
regular contact is with his seventy-two year mother in Kuwait.  When they talk, they talk
about family.  His other relatives he knew very little about and is not close to.  As a
result of this security clearance investigation, the Applicant contacted his mother to get
more information about his relatives in Kuwait to report to the DoD investigators.  The
Applicant has seven sisters, a brother, and two brother-in-laws who are also citizens
3
and residents of Kuwait.  His father, before he passed away in 2004, retired years ago
as a driver for a government ministry.  Applicant believes that his mother receives a
government pension for her husband’s service.  Other than his sister who came to visit
in 1982, he has not seen any of his relatives in Kuwait since he left in 1978.  The only
contact he has with any of his relatives on any regular basis is his mother.  He contacts
her once a month or once every two to three months.  Sometimes it goes six months
before he calls her.  (Tr. p 54).  He has refrained from talking with her because he does
not want it to jeopardize his security clearance.  At times when he contacts his mother, if
one of his sisters is there, he speaks to them briefly about family matters.  
His eldest sister is a retired school teacher.  Her husband, before he retired,
worked for a government ministry.  Another sister is married to a senior officer in the
Kuwaiti Army.  The Applicant has never met him and has absolutely no contact with
him.  (Tr. p. 57).  Applicant’s youngest sister, whom he also has never met, lives with
their mother and works for an automobile insurance company.  (Tr. pp. 55 and 108).
Another sister is a kindergarten principal and she is married to man who works for the
Kuwait Oil Company.  The other sisters are either middle school, high school, or college
teachers.  One of the Applicant’s brother-in-law’s works for a government ministry.  The
Applicant has never met or spoken to him.  Another sister is married to a retired police
officer.  Another sister is a homemaker and she is married to an Engineer who works for
a government ministry.  Applicant’s only brother works for a government ministry where
he is a supervisor.  The Applicant speaks to him about once a year.  (Tr. p. 98).  The
Applicant has never told any of his relatives including his mother, with whom he is the
closest, that he works for the defense industry.  (Tr. p. 58).  None of his family have any
knowledge as to what the Applicant does for a living or with whom he works.  None of
his family in Kuwait is affiliated with any terrorists organization.  (Tr. p. 119).
           
At one time in 2007, the Applicant was planning to visit his mother because he
learned that she was very ill.  Her health improved and he did not pursue the issue.
When asked whether he would like to travel to Kuwait in the future, the Applicant
responded, ‘NO”.  “If there is a security concern.  I had it in my mind I am going to go
see my mother.  That was the only thing, but I don’t have no plans to go.”  (Tr. p. 110).
The Applicant testified that he contacted his security officer and was told that he could
periodically contact his mother by telephone without it presenting a security issue.  (Tr.
pp. 121-122).
The Applicant considers himself to be an American, and with honor, dignity and
loyalty he states that he will protect the interests of the United States.  He states that he
would never under any circumstances divulge unauthorized classified information to
anyone.  If he is ever confronted to do so, he would contact his security department and
possibly the FBI and DSS.  (Tr. p. 125).  He does not participate in any cultural events
or activities of middle eastern affairs.  He has no financial assets in Kuwait and has
never received any money from anyone in Kuwait.  He does not stand to inherit
anything from anyone in Kuwait.       
Twenty-five letters of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant from
professional associates, coworkers, managers, neighbors and friends, attest to his
overall stature of excellence.  On the job, he is said to be excellent at troubleshooting,
electrical modification abilities and at other job requirements in his expertise.  He works
4
as many hours as necessary in order to get the job done.  Some jobs require that he
travel to different locations to complete, and he never complains.  The Applicant is
known as a hardworking, responsible, reliable, trustworthy, loyal, dedicated citizen of
the United States.  His integrity has never been questioned by the company.  He is
highly respected by his management and peers and is considered to be a great asset to
the company.  To many, he is a close friend, known as a loyal father and husband, who
has been a good provider to his family.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and Post-Hearing Exhibit
A). 
Applicant has received numerous awards and certificates of appreciation for his
exceptional and outstanding performance and contributions on the job.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A).   
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the country of Kuwait.
Kuwait is a small oil-rich constitutional monarchy, ruled by the Al-Sabah family.  The
dispute between Iraq and Kuwait’s borders and the subsequent invasion of Kuwait by
Iraq, led to the first Persian gulf war between Iraq and a UN mandated coalition of
countries led by the United States in 1991.  The Government of Kuwait is an important
partner in the ongoing U.S. led campaign against international terrorism, providing
assistance in the military, diplomatic and intelligence arenas and also supporting efforts
to block financing of terrorist groups.  In terms of dealing with terrorists, Kuwait still lacks
the strong legal provisions to deal effectively with those engaged in conspiracy to
commit terrorist acts.  The Kuwaiti government continues to strengthen its legal regime
for combating money laundering and terrorist financing, but problems persisted,
particularly with enforcement.  Although money laundering was a criminal offense,
terrorist financing was not specifically prohibited.  Kuwait engaged in Human Rights
abuses, including granting no right to change government or to form political parities,
restrictions of freedom of speech and the press, assembly and association of religion;
corruption; trafficking in person and the unequal rights of women.  Kuwait is a
destination for trafficked women and instances of trafficking were reported during the
period.  Kuwait is a Sunni Islam dominated society.  Shi’s are free to worship however,
according to their faith without government interference, and the overall situation for
Shi’s remain stable.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
5
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (b) the is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal or the
individual has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
6
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and her ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign influence and has foreign connections
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate
questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the
United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security
rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
7
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S., 8(b) there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal or the individual has deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 8(c) contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation also apply.
Although the Applicant has many family members who are residents and citizens
of Kuwait, the Applicant is not close to any of them.  The exception is  his mother with
whom he has minimal contact by telephone, that ranges from once a month to once
every six months.  The other relatives, include seven sisters, a brother and three
brother-in-laws.  Some of them he has never met, and others with whom he has never
talked or has superficial conversations with about once a year when they are at his
mothers house when he calls her.  Although some of his relatives work for the Kuwait
government in some capacity, none of his relatives have knowledge of what the
Applicant does for a living nor who he works for.  Furthermore, they do not have any
contact with the Applicant and therefore do not pose a security risk.  
Here in the United States, the Applicant has a wife and two sons who are native
American citizens.  He has spent the last thirty years of his life working hard to establish
himself as a responsible, educated, productive United States citizen.  He has made
great contributions to the Defense Department as evidence by his many awards and
commendations.  He has adopted the American way of life as his own as evidenced by
his many favorable recommendations from American comrades who speak so highly on
him.  Clearly, his deep and abiding ties are here in the United States.  His employment
with the DoD and his assets are all in the United States.  He has never returned to
Kuwait since coming to the United States in 1978.  The Applicant essentially cut all ties
from Kuwait when he moved to the United States at the age of twenty-one and made it
his permanent home.  
It is noted that the current political situation in Kuwait elevates the cause for
concern in this case.  However, the evidence shows that the Applicant has no bond and
affection with her foreign family members or to any foreign individual or to Kuwait in any
8
way that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, there is no possibility of
foreign influence that exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to
foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.e.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.f.:  For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.g.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
