 As authorized by the DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive, Section E3.1.1.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08176
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On March 28, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions
(SF 86) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with a defense contractor, for
whom he works as a truck driver. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant written interrogatories  regarding adverse financial information in his1
background. After Applicant responded to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered in4
support of the government’s case.
2
national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On October 29,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under3
Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant timely responded to the SOR and
requested a decision without a hearing. On January 16, 2009, Department Counsel
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the government’s4
preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on February 1, 2009, and timely
responded to it. The case was assigned to me on February 20, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in
August 2008, and that they disclosed liabilities of approximately $428,583. (SOR ¶ 1.a)
Applicant admitted the allegation without explanation. (Items 1 and 3) In addition to the
facts entered in the record through Applicant’s admission, I make the following findings
of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 59-year-old truck driver for a company doing business with the
Department of Defense. He has held his current job since March 2008, but was
employed as a driver with another company from August 1997 until March 2008.
(FORM, Item 7) When Applicant submitted his application for a security clearance, he
listed seven delinquent credit card accounts totaling approximately $115,973. (FORM,
Item 7) A credit bureau report obtained during Applicant’s background investigation
(FORM, Item 9) revealed additional delinquent accounts. The accounts in question were
opened between 2003 and 2007, with most becoming past due or delinquent in the past
two years. The same document shows Applicant has remained current on other
accounts such as his mortgage and car payments.
In response to written interrogatories about his debts, he submitted a copy of a
recent pay stub, and a personal financial statement (PFS) showing a net monthly
remainder after expenses of about $733. He also submitted a copy of a Chapter 7
bankruptcy petition he and his wife filed on August 22, 2008. In that petition, they
declared $428,583.79 in liabilities against $254,615 in assets. (FORM, Item 8) It
appears from a review of information in the bankruptcy petition, which lists a trade or
business name along with certain types of personal property used as collateral for
creditors’ secured claims, that Applicant and his wife may have been in business for
themselves recently. However, it is unclear how, if at all, any of the unpaid debts listed
in Schedules E and F were related to possible business ventures. Further, the
information presented in the petition about their income versus expenses shows that, as
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
3
of the bankruptcy filing, Applicant and his wife actually had a negative monthly cashflow.
(FORM, Item 8)
According to the DOHA interrogatories, Applicant was interviewed by a
government investigator in May 2008. However, there is no information in the record
about the results of that interview that may have shed some light on Applicant’s
circumstances. Nor did Applicant provide any amplifying information with her admission
to the single SOR allegation. In response to the FORM, Applicant stated only he had
nothing new to add, that he could not afford an attorney to help him, and that he was
working to overcome his financial problems. He also alluded to unspecified bad
business decisions that (presumably) caused his debts.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegation in SOR
¶ 1.a. Further, Applicant admitted the allegation without explanation. The presence of
recent unpaid debt and an apparent inability to pay require application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Additionally, the sheer volume of
debt owed through personal credit card accounts suggests that Applicant may have
been irresponsible in his spending habits. Such would require application of the
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 19(b) (indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt).
In response, Applicant has provided no information that would support
application of any of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. It would have been
helpful to have more investigative information about the origin and/or current status of
Applicant’s debts. As to his current and future financial prospects, his PFS reflects a
significant positive cash flow each month; however, the bankruptcy petition shows a
negative monthly cashflow. Regardless, the government established that Applicant has
incurred significant unpaid personal debt. This was sufficient to support the
government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant’s request for a clearance. Thus,
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
5
the burden shifted to the Applicant to present sufficient information to mitigate the
security concerns raised by the facts established through the SOR. Applicant had two
opportunities to present that information – when he responded to the SOR and/or when
he responded to the FORM. Applicant’s resolution of his debts through bankruptcy,
without more information about, for example, the causes of the debts, his current
finances, and the prospects for his finances in the future, is not enough to overcome the
government’s concerns about Applicant’s suitability.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). However, aside from the fact of
Applicant’s age and personal history, there is no available information aside from the
fact of his recent financial problems that would support application of any of the whole
person factors. As such, significant doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available9
information bearing on Applicant’s finances shows he has failed to address satisfactorily
the government’s doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s
interests as his own. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
