 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00024
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
On April 2, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On August 12,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 Jx. I is one of the contracts of sale she signed. (Tr. 54 - 57)3
2
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under2
Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline F (financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 13, 2008, and I convened a hearing on December 17,
2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented four exhibits (Gx.
1 - 3). Applicant testified and presented one witness. She also submitted six exhibits
(Ax. A - F). Additionally, I have included a single-page document in the record as
Judicial Exhibit (Jx.) I. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on December 29,
2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $51,904
for the balance on a foreclosed $259,543 mortgage. (SOR ¶ 1.a). The government also
alleged she “failed to candidly answer the Financial Interrogatories mailed to [her] and
to provide complete and detailed answers including a personal financial statement as
requested by the Government detailing [her] financial status and [her] ability to pay [her]
debts and household expenses as they come due.” (SOR ¶ 2.a)  In response, Applicant
denied all of the SOR allegations and provided with her answer information about the
SOR ¶ 1.a allegation. After reviewing the pleadings, the transcript, and the parties’
exhibits, I have made the following findings of relevant fact. 
Applicant is 30 years old and has been employed by a large defense contractor
since June 2001. She has held several different positions with her employer, and she
has moved three times (from Virginia to Georgia in July 2002; from Georgia to Florida in
May 2005; from Florida back to Georgia in October 2006). Applicant attended college
from August 1997 until May 2001, when she received a B.S. in Computer Science. She
is currently working on her M.S. in Computer Science. Between January 2000 and June
2000, Applicant worked as a college intern for her current employer. Her most recent
performance appraisal reflects excellent work and potential for continued advancement
in a demanding environment. (Gx. 1; Tr. 6)
Applicant presented her mother as a witness. She testified that, in December
2002, she answered a newspaper ad, which presented an opportunity to buy five
townhouses she could own as rental properties. (Tr. 57) The ad offered owner
financing, which was attractive to her because she would not have to qualify for a loan.
In February 2003, Applicant’s mother entered into an agreement to buy the properties
from a married couple to whom Applicant’s mother was to make payments directly.  She3
made payments as agreed for three months. Thereafter, she was contacted by the bank
creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.a and was informed they now held the mortgage on her
3
townhouses. She then sent her payments to the bank as required. Applicant’s mother
was soon unable to rent the properties for a variety of reasons. The properties were
located in a bad neighborhood which would not support the rent she needed to charge.
Also, some of the properties were damaged by storms that rendered them uninhabitable
for a long periods of time. Concurrently, she was unable to refinance due to falling
property values and soon ran out of funds to pay the mortgages. The properties went to
foreclosure and were sold at auction in June 2005. According to Applicant’s mother, the
properties were sold for at least what was owed in arrears. (Tr. 64) For tax purposes,
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was notified the properties had been abandoned or
acquired by another party and that the debts were cancelled. The resulting benefit to
Applicant’s mother became taxable income for the 2005 tax year. (Tr. 35 - 43; Ax. A;
Gx. 3; Answer to SOR)
When Applicant’s mother entered into the agreement to purchase the
townhouses, the sellers required a co-signer to guarantee performance on the
obligations. Applicant’s mother signed Applicant’s name to the contracts without
Applicant’s knowledge or permission. (Jx. I) She did not inform Applicant of her plans to
buy the townhouses. Applicant only became aware of her mother’s ownership of rental
properties sometime after the deal was done. (Ax. A; Tr. 37, 50 - 51, 81, 97 - 98) As a
result of her mother’s actions, the loans and, ultimately, their delinquent status were
reported in Applicant’s credit history. The tax effects of the debt cancellation also
affected Applicant’s income tax reporting requirements for 2005. However, Applicant’s
mother is the only party with a remaining IRS obligation. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 3; Tr.  It
is unclear how Applicant’s personal information (e.g., her social security number,
address, employer, etc.) was obtained by the creditor, as both Applicant and her mother
denied having provided it to anyone as part of this transaction. (Tr. 54, 82)
While Applicant became aware her mother had purchased rental properties soon
after the transactions, she was not aware her mother had obligated her as a co-signer
to the mortgages. In 2004, Applicant was turned down for a personal loan when a credit
check showed she was in default on five mortgages. Her mother told her what
happened only when Applicant confronted her about the matter. (Tr. 44, 70) Applicant
has disputed the information in her credit report about the defaulted mortgages. She
also obtained information from the creditor showing she was no longer listed on three of
the accounts. (Attachments to SOR Answer; Tr. 75 - 77)
Applicant has held a security clearance since 2001. In October 2006, during in-
processing at her current job site, she spoke with the local Facility Security Officer
(FSO) about a variety of topics related to her suitability for access to classified
information. She disclosed the adverse information about her mother’s actions and their
impact on her credit. In April 2007, she submitted an e-QIP for a periodic update of her
clearance. She disclosed the fact she was listed as a co-signer on delinquent properties
her mother had acquired. (Gx. 1) In November 2007, her FSO came to her and
suggested Applicant provide more detailed information about what had happened. She
subsequently included with her e-QIP a letter explaining what had happened. (Gx. 1; Tr.
70 - 72; Ax. A)
 No summary or other record of that interview was produced.4
 Directive. 6.3.5
4
A few months later, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator
about information in her background. The adverse information about the defaulted
mortgages on her credit report was discussed. (Tr. 72 - 73)  In April 2008, after4
reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, a DOHA adjudicator sent
to Applicant written interrogatories seeking additional information about one of her
mother’s defaulted mortgage accounts in the amount of $51,904 attributed to Applicant
in a credit report obtained by government investigators. 
Applicant insists she timely responded to the interrogatories as required, but she
did not retain a copy of her response. In support of her claim, she points to Gx. 2, which
consists of documents sent to her by the IRS in May 2008. She asserted that  she sent
in response to the interrogatories those IRS documents, as well as other documents,
which she also attached to her SOR Answer. She also claimed she spoke by telephone
with the adjudicator handling her case seeking guidance about what she needed to
submit. (Tr. 73 - 87) Applicant also testified she spoke with the adjudicator after the
SOR was issued, and that the adjudicator acknowledged at that time having received
her response to the interrogatories. (Tr. 100 - 101) In support of the SOR allegation that
Applicant “failed to candidly answer the Financial Interrogatories mailed to [her],” the
government submitted a blank version of the interrogatory. (Gx. 2) However, it was also
uncontested that the information in Gx. 3 was received from the Applicant as part of her
response to interrogatories. (Tr. 22 - 24, 92 - 93) Accordingly, I find as fact that the
Applicant responded to the interrogatories sent to her by a DOHA adjudicator.
Aside from the adverse effect of her mother’s actions on her credit rating,
Applicant’s finances are sound. She has been financially independent since high school
(Tr. 44 - 45), relying on student loans to fund her college and post-graduate education.
Available information (Gx. 4 and Ax. D) shows she has payed those loans as agreed.
While her credit history also reflects occasional credit problems in the past 10 years,
those  appear to have been resolved satisfactorily. Applicant is a two-time homeowner
and has a modest positive monthly cashflow, but her expenses include repayment of
credit obligations, all of which are current. (Ax. C) Finally, she has been proactive in her
efforts to resolve her mother’s malfeasance (Tr. 74 - 77; Attachments to SOR Answer).
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
5
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial
Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
6
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegation in SOR
¶ 1.a. Information obtained during the most recent investigation of her suitability for
access to classified information showed there was a delinquent mortgage account
totaling $51,904 attributable to Applicant. The information also showed the account was
delinquent as of 2005 and was still unpaid as of June 2007. Accordingly, the record
requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations).
In response, Applicant presented sufficient information to show the debt was not
hers. She also presented sufficient information (her mother’s testimony, the documents
attached to her answer to the SOR, and the documents in Gx. 3, which were submitted
in response to the DOHA interrogatories) to show that the debt in ¶ SOR 1.a is being
resolved and that there is a legitimate dispute about the debt. Further, the record shows
that Applicant lives well within her means and has not engaged in irresponsible
spending or excessive use of her personal credit. Her current credit history contains no
other adverse entries; to the contrary, it reflects a sound use of personal credit and of
paying her debts. The foregoing supports application of the mitigating conditions at AG
¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) (emphasis
added), AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts) (emphasis added), and AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). On balance, Applicant presented
available information sufficient to show she is unlikely to act contrary to the national
interest to get money to repay the alleged debt. Available information is sufficient to
mitigate the alleged security concerns about Applicant’s finances. 
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in AG ¶
15, is
 As contemplated by DOHA Operating Instruction (OI) 18, Section 4.4 (Written Interrogatories) and Section9
4.5 (Second Chance).
7
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
Applicant denied the SOR ¶ 2.a allegation that she had “failed to candidly answer
the Financial Interrogatories mailed to [her] and to provide complete and detailed
answers including a personal financial statement as requested by the Government
detailing [her] financial status and [her] ability to pay [her] debts and household
expenses as they come due.” Accordingly, the burden was on the government to
present sufficient credible information to prove that allegation. (Directive, E3.1.14)
Failure to respond to the interrogatories would have required application of the
adjudicative factor at AG ¶ 15(b) (refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination). It may also be
disqualifying if Applicant deliberately falsified any statement she made to the
government regarding relevant and material information about her suitability to hold a
clearance. (AG ¶16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities); AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative).
At the beginning of the hearing, I asked Department Counsel if the SOR ¶ 2.a
allegation was that Applicant did not respond to the interrogatories or that her answer
was untruthful. Department Counsel stated that it was both - that Applicant had failed to
answer the interrogatory and that her non-answer was untruthful. (Tr. 20 - 22) Intuitively,
this makes no sense. It is not possible to falsify a statement that has not been made.
The allegation is also flawed, because it does not specify what information was false.
For example, there is no allegation that Applicant stated one thing during her
background investigation but either failed to disclose that information or gave an
inconsistent version in response to the government’s interrogatories. Nonetheless, the
weight of the government’s own information bearing on the issue of whether Applicant
responded to the interrogatories (Gx. 3 and the testimony at Tr. 22 - 24) shows she did
comply with the government’s request for information. The government’s reliance on
Gx. 2 (a blank version of the interrogatory purported to have been issued to Applicant)
is not conclusive of anything, while it is uncontested that the contents of Gx. 3 were part
of her response to the interrogatories. Assuming (solely for the purpose of discussion)
that Applicant did not respond to the interrogatories, there is no indication that DOHA
adjudicators contacted Applicant or her employer to indicate that processing of her
clearance could be terminated.9
8
As to whether what was submitted was truthful, the government did not present
any information that showed what Applicant submitted in connection with this matter
was false or misleading. To the contrary, available information, including Applicant’s
credible testimony (Tr. 73 - 74) about her interactions with the DOHA adjudicator as
Applicant was preparing her response, shows Applicant has readily and candidly
disclosed the adverse information at each stage of the re-investigation of her clearance.
She had even disclosed that information to her FSO before she filled out her e-QIP (Gx.
1) It is unlikely, therefore, that she would suddenly decide not to comply with a request
for adverse information she had already disclosed to her employer and had discussed
with a government investigator during her background investigation. On balance, I
conclude the government failed to establish either that Applicant did not respond or that
she has made any false statements about her finances.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 30 years old and is a
mature, responsible adult. She is a successful, independent single mother who put
herself through school, has been paying off her student loans as required since 2001,
and who shows potential for continued advancement with the company where she has
worked for nearly eight years. She has been candid and forthcoming about her finances
at all stages of this matter, and there has been no misconduct on her part. A fair and
commonsense evaluation of this record shows that the security concerns raised by
information showing Applicant may have owed one debt has been refuted. Her finances
do not put her at risk of acting contrary to the national interest, and the stated concerns
about her personal conduct were unfounded. Any doubts about Applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information have been satisfied.
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
