                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02106 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on May 30, 
2007. On August 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 6, 2008, and requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On November 17, 2008, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file.  Applicant filed a 
response to the FORM on December 12, 2008, within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on December 17, 2008. I received the case assignment on January 
22, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 6, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in && 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, 1.j, and 1.k of the SOR, with explanations.  He 
denied the allegations in ¶ ¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old, divorced, and works for a defense contractor. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts totaling $12,500 in 11 debts.  He claims he does 
not have sufficient income to repay these debts, except his education loan which he is 
required to repay.   He also claims he cannot consolidate his debts and repay them 
because the agencies he consulted tell him his monthly income is too low to qualify for a 
debt consolidation loan.  (Items 3, 4, 6-10, FORM Response) 
 
Applicant’s first debt listed in the SOR is for $6,638 owed on his 2003 Federal 
income taxes.  This debt is unpaid. (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant owes $160 on a credit card.  It is unpaid. (Items 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant owes $511 to a creditor.  It is unpaid. (Items 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant owes $2,314 for a television he purchased for $1,600.  This debt is also 
unpaid. (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant denied he owed a telephone bill for $851.  He claims it is owed by 
someone else, but did not submit any proof of this debt being owed by another person.  
The debt remains unpaid. (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant is paying $150 a month on his education loan of $13,487.  (Items 3, 4, 
6-10, FORM Response) 
 
Applicant admitted he owed $110 on a cable television video account.  He has 
not repaid this debt since 2004. (Items 4, 6-10) 
 
Applicant denied he owes the debts listed in SOR Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i for 
what he labels prepaid credit cards in the amount of $410 and $656.  He claims he 
purchased only one card for $75, and these debts are duplicates of each other.  Neither 
debt has been repaid.  (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant went to a hospital emergency room.  He thought the bill would be $350, 
but instead it was $2,926, as set forth in SOR Subparagraph1.j.  He has not paid this 
debt either. (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
The final debt is owed to a towing service which towed Applicant’s car.  Applicant 
claims the service sold the car and kept the proceeds.  The amount alleged to be owed 
is $1,644.  This debt is unpaid. (Items 3, 4, 6-10) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt of $12,500.  He 
has not paid them, and offers no reasonable, good-faith explanation as to why he has 
not paid these debts listed in the SOR, except that he does not have the money to do 
so.  He is required to repay the education loans, but claims in his FORM Response he 
needs his income to pay for his housing and current expenses. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
  
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The burden of proof is on him to 
show that the mitigating conditions should apply to him.  He failed in this burden by not 
showing that he is repaying any debts except his education loan, or that his problems 
were beyond his control, or that any of the remaining mitigating conditions could apply.  
Applicant claimed his income was insufficient to repay his debts.  He did not offer any 
documents or statements from anyone to support his contentions that someone else is 
liable on the telephone bill, or that the prepaid credit card debts are the same and that 
 
 
5 
 
 
he does not owe more than $75.  I do not find any potentially mitigating conditions are 
factors for consideration in this case.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant=s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recentcy of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant incurred these debts as 
an adult, the debts are still owed and nothing has been paid on the debts except for the 
education loan, and he did not present any evidence of any changes in his spending 
habits to show the same situation will not occur in the future.  His statements show his 
income is insufficient to repay these debts for several years in the future, at least, so the 
situation will recur.  The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress exists 
because of the size of Applicant’s debt. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
