                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 08-01127 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant successfully mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
On October 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline G. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 13 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 5, 2008, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on January 8, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
through 3. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and two 
witnesses testified on her behalf. She offered Exhibits (AE) A-G. Department Counsel 
did not object and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on January 26, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR except 1.b, which she denied. 
The admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, married since 1991, and the mother of three children, 
twin 10-year-olds and a 12-year-old. She graduated from college with an electrical 
engineering degree in 1988.1  
 
 Applicant drank beer in college to the same degree as most other college 
students. After graduating from college she drank alcohol casually. After she married 
she and her husband enjoyed wine tastings and drank wine. Her husband later began 
drinking scotch. She drank some scotch, but it was not until after her mother-n-law 
moved in with their family and introduced her to vodka did she begin increasing her 
alcohol consumption.2 
 
 During 2001 Applicant had a series of stressful events take place in her life. She 
had previously had a wonderful relationship with her mother-in-law, but when she 
needed a place to live and came to live with Applicant and her family the relationship 
became strained. During this time Applicant’s father was diagnosed with cancer and 
died nine months later. Applicant also had a long time beloved pet die. These events 
were in addition to the anxiety she felt after the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
bombings.3  
 
 Applicant, her mother-in-law, and husband would have a cocktail/vodka each 
evening after the children were put to bed. Her husband and mother-in-law would get 
tired after consuming the vodka and go to bed. The alcohol tended to energize 
Applicant. Applicant became concerned about her drinking during this time and asked 
her husband and mother-in-law if her drinking was becoming a concern. Both assured 
her she did not have a drinking problem.4  
 
 From 2001 to 2006, Applicant’s drinking progressed and vodka was her drink of 
choice. By 2006 she found herself drinking vodka daily and she began hiding her 
1 Tr. 23-24. 
 
2 Tr. 24-25. 
 
3 Tr. 25-26. 
 
4 Tr. 26-28. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
drinking from her husband. Applicant had a great deal of anxiety in her life. She was 
active in her children’s school and community. She was struggling with the possibility 
that she might be an alcoholic. She never drank at work or had any absences from work 
due to her alcohol consumption. She researched alcohol treatment facilities and 
programs during this time.5  
 
 In 2006 Applicant’s daughter graduated from 5th grade and Applicant felt 
overwhelmed by her emotions and was worried that if she did not get a handle on her 
drinking she would be going down a “slippery slope.” She and her husband discussed 
her drinking and the next day she made the decision that she had to take action 
immediately. On June 29, 2006, she told her husband about her daily alcohol 
consumption and she entered a treatment program the next day. Her husband fully 
supported her and went with her to the “intake” processing.6  
 
 Applicant selected an intensive outpatient program that requires abstinence. It is 
an eight-week program with 28 sessions spread out over the weeks with the sessions 
lasting three hours. After completion of the program, it is recommended that the patient 
attend at least 70 aftercare sessions to ensure long term recovery. Applicant attended 
more than 70 sessions. The sessions were once a week for two hours, meeting with 10 
to 12 other people along with an addiction counselor. Also part of the aftercare 
treatment is to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), which she did. Applicant consistently 
attended her group sessions that were located at a significant distance from her house. 
She liked the “home group” she participated in and was comfortable there. Applicant 
participated with her “home group” from June 2006 to July 2008.7 
 
On September 17, 2007, Applicant was taking care of her neighbor’s dog and 
was in their house. She noticed a bottle of vodka. She put some of the vodka in her soft 
drink and drank it. She felt so badly that she immediately contacted her AA sponsor and 
the alcohol treatment facility. She reenrolled for another ten sessions of the outpatient 
program for four weeks. Applicant admitted that prior to her relapse from about July 
2007 to September 2007 she had lost regular contact with her AA sponsor. She felt her 
AA sponsor was too strict and demanding. On the day of her relapse she told her 
sponsor that she was ready to listen to her and asked her to take her back. Her sponsor 
told her she was glad to have her back.8  
 
Applicant began attending AA in July 2006 as part of her intensive outpatient 
treatment requirement. She continued to attend through 2007 and after her relapse in 
September 2007 she increased her attendance to three times a week. In the middle of 
2008, Applicant admitted although she still attended AA the frequency had diminished 
5 Tr. 22-31, 57-62. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Tr. 31-35, 65-68. 
 
8 Tr. 35-45, 68-75. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
due to complacency. On August 13, 2008, while cleaning the garage, Applicant found a 
bottle with a small amount of vodka in it. She drank it. She called her sponsor right away 
and told her of her relapse. She also contacted her treatment facility. She resumed 
attending AA three times a week.9  
 
Applicant admitted that one of the difficulties she had was when she changed 
“home groups.” She was originally in a group that she felt very comfortable with and the 
members were all recovering alcoholics. She switched “home groups” to find one closer 
to her residence and was very unhappy. The group was transitory and had many 
members with other addictions. She struggled with participating in this group and was 
emotionally distraught about it. She eventually realized this “home group” was not 
working for her.10  
 
Another part of the intensive outpatient treatment program was for the patient to 
take Antabuse. Applicant used it during her treatment and has it at home in her “tool 
box.” The last time she took it was August 2008 after her relapse. She said she took it 
“just in case” for a period of a few weeks.11  
  
 Since her August 2008 relapse she has found an AA “home group” and has 
made a “service commitment” to that group. This is a group that she meets with at least 
once a week and she is accountable to the members of this group. She is active in the 
group beyond showing up once a week. Making a “service commitment” to the group is 
a significant milestone in her recovery. She has taken on the responsibility for the set up 
of the meeting. She is accountable to each “home group” members for remaining sober. 
She attends her AA “home group” weekly. She also attends other AA meetings 
throughout the week. Her “home group” does not have a “check the box” sign in sheet, 
for those who need to show they are attending due to court orders. This group is 
committed to long term sobriety.12  
 
 Applicant stated she has been completely through the AA 12-step program twice 
and has started the program again. She is now on steps 6-7 for the third time. She 
stated her sobriety is a life-long commitment and she practices the AA principles in all of 
her affairs. Each time she goes through the 12-step program she learns something 
new.13  
 
 Applicant revealed that she comes from a family of alcoholics, which is what 
made her suspicious that she might be one too. She confirmed that many of her family 
9 Tr. 35-45, 70-75. 
 
10 Tr. 41-45. 
 
11 Tr. 47, 81-84. 
 
12 Tr. 41-45. 
 
13 Tr. 68-79. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
are dead and she believed that although their death certificates did not list alcoholism 
as the cause of death, she is convinced it was a significant contributing factor.14  
 
Applicant has a strong relationship with her sponsor. Applicant and her sponsor 
email each other on a daily basis, they talk on the phone, and they have attended AA 
retreats. Applicant has attended four AA retreats.15  
 
 Applicant forcefully and credibly testified she would go to any lengths to protect 
her sobriety, including redefining her relationship with God, even if it meant doing things 
differently than how she was raised religiously. Applicant stated she is not ashamed of 
her alcoholism except if she did nothing about it.16 
 
 Applicant sees a counselor on a weekly basis to help her with dealing with 
overwhelming emotional issues and anxiety. She is on prescribed anti-anxiety and 
antidepressant medication. Applicant’s mother-in-law no longer lives with her and her 
husband is very supportive of her sobriety. As a show of respect and solidarity her 
husband also refrains from alcohol consumption. There is no alcohol in the house and 
they do not serve it to guests. He attends a regular monthly poker game and brings ice 
tea to drink to show his support for his wife. Applicant’s children know she is an 
alcoholic. Her husband has sat down with each child individually to discuss his wife’s 
alcoholism and answered any questions or concerns they may have. Her family 
understands that sobriety is her first priority. Applicant’s close friends know of her 
alcoholism and all of her family is aware of it. Applicant has an AA bumper sticker on 
her car.17  
 
 Applicant’s sponsor testified on her behalf. She has participated as Applicant’s 
sponsor since October 2006. She is not a therapist, but rather also a recovering 
alcoholic. She has been a sponsor to about 6-7 people in the past, but presently she is 
sponsoring only Applicant. She and Applicant have gone through the 12-step study. 
They have a close relationship, have gone on retreats together, meet once a week, and 
are in contact frequently. She confirmed that when Applicant relapsed she was 
contacted by Applicant immediately. She also testified that she believes Applicant will 
go to any lengths for her recovery and to stay sober. Her sponsor also confirmed that 
Applicant is totally willing and committed to her sobriety. She believes Applicant was 
struggling for a period with her identity as an alcoholic, but has since surrendered and 
accepted her alcoholism. She believes Applicant understands that her sobriety has to 
come first. She also confirmed that Applicant has strong family support and her 
husband is an advocate for her recovery.18  
14 Tr. 51. 
 
15 Tr. 65-79. 
 
16 Tr. 44-45. 
 
17 Tr. 47-50, 79-81, 85-104. 
 
18 Tr. 50-79. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Another witness testified on behalf of Applicant. This witness is also a recovering 
alcoholic who met Applicant at one of the AA meetings. They shared a room on a 3-day 
AA retreat and got to know each other. She testified that they shared a great deal and 
part of the AA creed is to live an open and honest life, one of integrity and to examine 
one’s motives. She believes Applicant is committed to her sobriety. They talk to each 
other frequently and support each other.19 
  
Applicant provided a letter from her mental health counselor who stated she has 
been treating her since February 2007.20 She meets with her approximately once a 
week. She confirmed that Applicant has shown good improvement in her coping skills 
and developed a better insight about her triggers for relapse on alcohol use. She has 
made significant progress toward improved self esteem, confidence and anxiety 
management. She confirmed that in addition to individual counseling, Applicant has 
been actively engaged in AA meetings and has developed healthy interpersonal 
relationships within the program which is a good prognostic indicator of commitment 
and success. Her counselor commented on Applicant’s brief relapse in August 2008 
and that she was quick to respond to it. She increased her frequency of AA meeting, 
established a service position at her regular meeting, and also requested Antabuse as 
an additional tool. The counselor also noted that Applicant has consistently shown a 
commitment to treating her dependence on alcohol through her actions and behavior. 
Specifically she stated: 
 
She demonstrates a high motivation for exploring all necessary options 
including medication treatment. She is also open to therapeutic 
recommendations I suggest. Her actions demonstrate a dedication and a 
desire to protect her abstinence and have resulted in an established 
pattern of abstinence over the last three years. Based on her behavior, I 
believe [Applicant] to be reliable and trustworthy both personally and 
professionally.21 
 
Applicant works about 30 hours a week. She is a committed volunteer at her 
children’s schools and their athletic teams. She teaches religious education at her 
church. She has been a Girl Scout leader for eight years. She also serves as a foster 
care giver for a horse rescue organization and is presently caring for a horse. She also 
adopts feral cats and has then neutered or spayed. She volunteers with the Salvation 
Army through a “Dress for Success” service project. Applicant provided character letters 
from those serving with her in her volunteer projects. They are aware of her alcoholism 
and attest that she has not demonstrated irresponsible conduct, but rather to the 
 
 
19 Tr. 105-112. 
 
20 AE D. Her mental health professional is a psychiatric nurse practitioner. She has conducted 
interviews to determine psychiatric diagnosis and makes recommendations for treatment. She is licensed 
to prescribe medication as well as offer counseling services. She also has extensive experience with the 
treatment of substance abuse disorders.  
 
21 AE D. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
contrary she is a committed and responsible volunteer who they respect and admire.22 
Applicant also provided copies of her performance appraisals from her employer which 
reflects her consistently outstanding performance.23 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
22 AE A, B, C, and G. 
 
23 Tr. 113-117; AE E and F. 
 
8 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including: 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant was drinking everyday and hiding it from her husband. Due to her own 
concern for her welfare Applicant referred herself for treatment to an alcohol treatment 
program. She admitted she was diagnosed by a qualified medical professional as 
alcohol dependent. She successfully completed the program, but had a relapse when 
she consumed a small amount of alcohol in August 2008. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser”); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with a treatment recommendation, such as 
participation in meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
profession or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant referred herself for alcohol treatment because she was concerned about her 
alcohol consumption due to her family history. Applicant acknowledges she is an 
alcoholic. She has not had any alcohol-related incidents. She successfully completed 
the extensive program, completed after-care beyond what was required or 
recommended. She participates in AA beyond just attending meetings, but rather has 
made a service commitment to her “home group” to which she is accountable. She has 
a sponsor that she is committed to and who is committed to her. She attends AA 
retreats. She has strong family support. Her family and friends know she is an alcoholic. 
She readily admitted she had a relapse and immediately took control of the situation by 
going back to her treatment facility and attending a refresher, reengaging her sponsor, 
and renewing her commitment to AA.  
 
 Applicant has not had any alcohol-related incidents that have prompted her to 
seek treatment. Rather she recognized she had an alcohol problem and committed her 
life to on-going treatment of that problem, through her commitment to abstinence, her 
constant reflection through repeatedly working through the 12-step AA program, her 
daily contact with her sponsor, and her weekly treatment with her counselor. Applicant’s 
commitment to an alcohol-free life is impressive. She does not just say the right words 
she follows through with her commitment with action. Applicant did not enroll in a 
treatment program because she had trouble at work or she had an alcohol-related 
offense, but rather she did it for herself and her family. Her testimony was completely 
honest, including her comments about her mistakes. She made no attempt to minimize 
or justify her actions. She is completely devoted to her sobriety and recognizes when 
she needs help from others.  
 
 I find mitigating condition (a) applies because Applicant confronted her 
alcoholism and has taking profound and monumental steps to ensure it does not 
become an adverse issue in her life. I find because of her actions, it does not cast doubt 
on her reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I also find (b) applies because of 
her acknowledged alcoholism and the steps she has taken to remain abstinent. I find (d) 
applies because of her treatment she has completed and her commitment to AA. 
Although Applicant’s mental health professional does not appear part of a recognized 
 
10 
 
 
alcohol treatment program, I find her credentials comply with the spirit, if not the letter of 
the mitigating condition. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 42-year-old 
acknowledged alcoholic. She referred herself for treatment before her alcoholism took 
over her life. She completed treatment and aftercare and regularly attends AA. She is 
totally committed to her sobriety, despite having short relapses. Applicant is aware of 
the importance of her sobriety for her self preservation and for her family. She has the 
active support of her family, friends, and sponsors. She never once wavered in taking 
responsibility for sobriety and has a committed awareness of all that she must do to stay 
sober. Applicant is an alcoholic, but is also a committed mother, wife, employee, friend, 
and perennial volunteer. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Alcohol Consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
      
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
