 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06004 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct security 
concerns are mitigated by the passage of time and his successful rehabilitation. His 
past questionable behavior does not raise questions about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
August 25, 2011, requesting the continuation of his secret security clearance granted to 
him in 2006. The Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct), Guideline G 
(alcohol consumption), and Guideline J (criminal conduct) on April 25, 2014.1 Applicant 
answered the SOR on May 16, 2014, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2014. The Defense Office of 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on October 30, 2014, 
scheduling a hearing for December 4, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant 
testified and submitted two exhibits (AE 1 and 2). All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations. His admissions are 
hereby incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
high school in June 2004, and completed three college semesters between 2004 and 
2005. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps in January 2006, where he served 
until the end of his enlistment in December 2010. He was honorably discharged with the 
rank of corporal (E-4). Applicant is not married, and he has no children.  
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana from the fall of 1999 until June 2005. He used 
marijuana approximately six times between 1999 and 2001. While in high school, 
Applicant used marijuana approximately once every two or three months. Applicant 
stopped using marijuana in the fall of 2003, in anticipation of applying for a position with 
his state’s police cadet program. His application was rejected in 2004 because of the 
police’s two-year drug free policy. Applicant entered college in September 2004, and 
resumed his use of marijuana. He only smoked marijuana twice while in college. 
Applicant testified that he has not used marijuana since June 2005. (GE 5; Tr. 25) 
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA when he enlisted in the Marine Corps in 
January 2006, and he was interviewed by a government investigator in September 
2006. Applicant was candid during that interview and disclosed his prior illegal 
marijuana use. Applicant started experimenting with alcohol in 1999. He consumed 
alcoholic beverages approximately once every six months from 1999 to 2003. In 2003, 
his alcohol consumption increased, and once a month he would drink to intoxication. 
Between 2004 and 2005, his alcohol consumption again increased, and he was drinking 
to intoxication approximately twice a month. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol consumption decreased when he enlisted in the Marine Corps 
in January 2006. After completing his basic training, in July 2006, he resumed his 
alcohol consumption and was drinking to intoxication approximately twice a month. 
Between August 2008 and April 2009, Applicant was deployed aboard a ship and his 
alcohol consumption was substantially reduced. In September 2008, Applicant went 
ashore on a port call with two other Marines. He was ordered to be the designated 
sober person of the group. Applicant disobeyed that order and became intoxicated. He 
received field-grade level non-judicial punishment for disobeying the order.  
 
3 
 
 
While on terminal leave from the Marine Corps, Applicant started working for his 
current employer, a government contractor. He was discharged from the Marine Corps 
in December 2010. In May 2011, Applicant drove after consuming alcoholic beverages 
and was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). At the time, he was 
25 years old. He started attendance at an alcohol counseling program in June 2011. 
Applicant was placed on a pretrial diversion program and was sentenced to one year of 
supervised probation before judgment.  
 
Applicant disclosed his alcohol-related problems during a September 2011 
interview with a government investigator. He told the investigator that between May 
2011 (DUI arrest) and September 2011, he consumed alcoholic beverages four times. 
On one of those occasions, he consumed alcohol to intoxication. During the interview, 
he stated that the last time he consumed alcohol was three weeks before the interview. 
He claimed he did not intend to drink alcoholic beverages again because he did not 
want to be involved in any further alcohol-related issues.  
 
In his November 2013 response to DOHA interrogatories, and at his hearing, 
Applicant stated that he intends to continue consuming alcohol in the future, but in 
moderation. He averred that he has not driven after consuming alcohol since May 2011. 
Applicant testified that he currently consumes approximately three to four beers during a 
three to four-hour period. He consumed alcoholic beverages four days before the 
hearing. (GE 2; Tr. 30-31) 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his alcohol and drug-related behavior. He 
testified that he experimented with alcohol and illegal drugs because of his immaturity 
and poor judgment. He has never been diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent. He believes that he has matured and that he has learned from his past 
mistakes. Applicant loves his job and would like to continue serving his country in his 
current position.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the Government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
Applicant consumed alcoholic beverages from 1999 to November 2014, at times 
to excess and to the point of intoxication. He exercised questionable judgment by 
consuming alcohol to excess in 2008, when he violated an order not to consume 
alcohol, and in 2011 when he drove while under the influence of alcohol. Disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent” and AG ¶ 22(b): 
“alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or 
impaired condition . . . regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent” apply.  
 
  There are two Alcohol Consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
  I find that the above mitigating conditions apply and mitigate the alcohol 
considerations concerns. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related misconduct occurred 
in 2011. There is no evidence to show that he is abusing alcohol and exercising poor 
judgment. Applicant is consuming alcohol responsibly and in moderation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the Government’s concern is that criminal activity “creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” AG ¶ 30.  
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana from 1999 to June 2005. Additionally, he drove 
while under the influence of alcohol in May 2011, and disobeyed a lawful order in 2008. 
Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that the above mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant’s offenses are mitigated by the passage of time, and there is no 
evidence of recurrence or recent criminal activity. Applicant has matured and he has 
learned from his mistakes. He understands that to be eligible for a security clearance he 
 
6 
 
 
must demonstrate good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I note that he was 
candid throughout the security clearance process and readily disclosed and discussed 
the circumstances of his criminal conduct. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The personal conduct security concerns are based on the same facts alleged 
under the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct guidelines, incorporated herein: 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use from 1999 to June 2005, his May 2011 DUI, and his 
violation of a lawful order in 2008.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
7 
 
 
 For the same reasons discussed above under the alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct mitigating conditions, incorporated herein, I find that AG ¶ 17(c), (d), 
and (e) apply. Applicant’s past personal conduct is mitigated by the passage of time. 
There is no evidence of recurrence or recent behavior of security concern. Applicant 
has matured and he seems to have learned from his mistakes. He understands that to 
be eligible for a security clearance he must demonstrate good judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. He has been candid throughout the security clearance process. 
Applicant’s past questionable behavior does not raise security concerns about his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a government contractor. He was granted 
a secret clearance in 2006. He has worked for a government contractor since 2009. 
Applicant’s past misconduct is mitigated by the passage of time and his successful 
rehabilitation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3a:      For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
