 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10290 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 21, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
22, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 10, 2015. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 
19, 2015.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about India. The request was included in the record as HE I. Applicant 
did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I. The 
facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a and admitted the remaining allegations. I have 
incorporated her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. She graduated from high school in 1987. She married 
in 1989 and divorced in 1992. She has no children. Applicant was born in India. Her 
parents immigrated to the United States in 1978, and she and her three siblings 
followed in 1979. The family was sponsored by her mother’s sister. Her father became a 
naturalized citizen in 1985. She, her mother, and her siblings became naturalized 
citizens in 1986. None hold dual citizenship.1  
  
 After high school, Applicant worked at a bank for a period of time until her job 
was eliminated. In 1998, she started her own business. She is the sole owner and only 
employee. Some of her clients have contracts with the federal government. In 2010, 
Applicant was seeking to expand her business and potentially open a training center in 
India. An Indian person she met in 2005, who had lived in the United States before 
returning to India and was a realtor, helped her purchase property. He is a citizen and 
resident of India. She purchased office space in India for approximately $20,000. She 
used money she had saved, and the property was in her name. She opened two bank 
accounts in India in anticipation of doing business there. Their current balances are 
approximately $100 and $113, based on the current exchange rate.2  
 
Applicant abandoned her idea of opening a business in India when it became too 
difficult being a woman in a culturally male-dominated society. She listed the property 
for sale about six months ago. In the meantime, she rents the property so it does not 
remain empty and susceptible to vandalism. It has been rented for about a year. The 
monthly rent is $60. She estimated she breaks even after she pays the property taxes 
and maintenance costs compared to how much she receives in rent. To date, she has 
not had any offers to buy it. The property is worth about $15,000. She anticipates taking 
                                                          
1 Tr. 27-34, 43. 
 
2 Tr. 19-26, 32-42, 47-48, 51-52. 
 
3 
 
 
a loss on the property when it does sell. She transferred cash she intended to use for 
the business from her Indian bank accounts to her American accounts. However, she 
continues to maintain the two accounts in India so she can deposit the rent from the 
property. Once she sells the property, she intends to close the accounts. Applicant’s 
contact with the realtor is limited to discussing the sale of the property.3  
 
 Applicant maintains contact with a friend who is a citizen and resident of India 
whom she met in 1995. He works in the insurance business. When she is in India, she 
visits him and his family. She sometimes spends the night at their home before taking 
the train to travel within India. They occasionally speak on the telephone. He is married 
with children. He and his family have visited her in the United States four or five times.4  
 
 Applicant traveled to India for a period of 53 days in 2010 and for 67 days in 
2011 to develop her business. From December 2012 through February 2013, and 
September through November 2014, she returned to India as a volunteer to teach 
English as a second language to the children in the village where she and her parents 
lived before immigrating. She was not compensated. She stayed in a small apartment 
her parents purchased about five or six years ago.5  
 
 Applicant’s parents are retired. She and her parents jointly own a home where 
they live in the United States. Its estimated value is $400,000. There is no mortgage. 
She estimated her total worth to be approximately $875,000. One of her brothers has 
worked for a federal agency for 25 years and has a security clearance. Her other 
brother is a professional, and her sister is an administrative assistant.  Applicant has 
one family member, a paternal aunt that still resides in India. All of her immediate family 
members are citizens and residents of the United States. She has filed and paid her 
taxes on time. Applicant has never voted in India.6 
 
 Applicant provided character letters supporting her exemplary personal and 
professional conduct. She is considered intelligent, considerate, reliable, dependable, 
trustworthy and a team player. She testified she has lived in the United States for 30 
years and has tried to be a good citizen. She has worked hard, paid her taxes, and has 
never been in trouble.7 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr.22-26, 47-53, 64. 
 
4 Tr. 27, 60-64. 
 
5 Tr. 23-25, 43, 57-58. 
 
6 Tr. 43, 46-47, 54-57, 65-66. 
 
7 Tr. 66; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
India8 
 
 India is considered one of the most active countries involved in criminal 
espionage and U.S. export control enforcement cases. It also has a history of being 
among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information and 
there are specific incidents wherein India engaged in attempts to acquire export-
restricted products.  
 
 The U.S. Department of Justice reports there have been numerous criminal 
cases concerning export enforcement, economic espionage, theft of trade secrets, and 
embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving both the government of India and 
private companies and individuals in India. These cases involve the illegal unlicensed 
export to India of over 57 microwave amplifiers, products that have military application; 
stealing company proprietary information for use in India; and submitting false export 
licenses to the Commerce Department in connection with the shipment of nuclear 
testing equipment to an entity in India. The Department of Justice brought two separate 
cases against defendants charged with illegally exporting controlled products to Indian 
government entities involved in the development of ballistic missiles, as well as space 
launch vehicles and combat fighter jets. There are numerous other examples of illegal 
export or attempted illegal export cases involving India.  
 
 India experiences terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. citizens. 
Anti-Western terrorist groups, some on the U.S. Government’s list of foreign terrorist 
organizations, are active in India, including Islamist extremist groups. India remains 
subject to violent terrorist attacks and continues to be one of the most persistently 
targeted countries by transnational and domestic terrorist groups. In 2008, terrorists 
coordinated acts on multiple locations in Mumbai, targeting areas frequented by 
Westerners and killing at least 183 people, 165 of whom were civilians, including 6 
Americans. There were subsequent terrorist attacks in 2012 and 2013.  
 
 India has significant human rights problems. They include: police and security 
force abuses, extrajudicial killings, torture, rape, corruption at all levels of government, 
poor prison conditions, and arbitrary arrests and detention. Rape, domestic violence, 
dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual harassment and discrimination against 
women remain serious problems. Widespread impunity at all levels of government is 
also a serious problem.  
 
 India’s relations with Iran have traditionally been positive. It has reluctantly 
supported some measures against Tehran, but it is has been careful not to break ties, 
since to do so would increase India’s energy dependence on the Arab Persian Gulf 
states. India emphatically supports Tehran’s right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
India’s traditionally lenient stance on Iran has been a perennial source of friction with 
the United States. India has a long-standing military supply relationship with Russia and 
remains its largest supplier of military systems and spare parts.  
                                                          
8 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
 India and the United States share a number of security perspectives, including 
those on China and Asian balance of power calculations, terrorism, Afghanistan, 
maritime issue and weapons of mass destruction, even though they have differences on 
Pakistan and Iran.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member or friend living under a foreign government or owning property 
in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family and friends ties to a foreign country 
as well as each individual tie must be considered.  
 
7 
 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”9 
 
 India is a country with significant human rights issues, including violence against 
women. There is government corruption, and it has a history of espionage and export 
violations. These issues raise heightened security concerns. India also shares security 
perspectives on a number of issues with the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s has a business relationship with a realtor in India. At one time they 
may have had more contact, but now she has infrequent contact with him, except as it 
pertains to selling her property. I do not find this relationship rises to the level of creating 
a heightened risk. I find none of the above disqualifying conditions apply to this person.  
 
 Applicant has a friend who is a citizen and resident of India. She sees him and 
his family when she travels there, sometimes stays with them, and they have visited her 
in the United States several times. Her contact is more than casual and infrequent and 
creates a heightened security concern under AG ¶ 7(a). I find Applicant’s connection to 
them also creates a potential conflict of interest, and AG ¶ 7(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant has two bank accounts with a combined balance of about $213 and 
real estate in India estimated to be worth about $15,000, which creates a heightened 
risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant occasionally talks on the phone with her friend. She stays at his house 
when she is in India, and his family has visited her in the United States on numerous 
occasions. Her contact with him is more than casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
or friends are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or 
there is terrorist activity within the country.  
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since she was a child. She has 
significant assets in the United States. She owns her own business. All of her family 
members are citizens and residents of the United States, except a paternal aunt. Her 
friend is an insurance salesman. There is no evidence he has close ties to the Indian 
government. Although India and United States have conflicts on certain issues, and 
India is known to be involved in espionage and illegal exports, there is no evidence that 
it exploits its citizens to gain intelligence. It is unlikely Applicant’s friend could raise a 
concern and place Applicant in a position of having to choose between him and the 
interests of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant has been a citizen of the United States 
since 1986. She owns a business in the United States and considerable assets. She 
lives with her parents, who are citizens of the United States. I conclude that based on 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant owns property in India that is worth about $15,000. She has two bank 
accounts with a combined balance of about $213 that she maintains until she sells the 
property. The property has been on the market for six months and is rented in order to 
maintain its value. She earns no income from the rent after paying maintenance fees. 
Her assets in India are small compared to her total financial worth in the United States. 
Those Indian assets are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used to 
effectively influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old. She has lived in the United States since 1979 and 
became a naturalized citizen when she was 16 years old. She attempted to start a 
business in India and abandoned it when it became too difficult. She is in the process of 
divesting one piece of real estate and two small bank accounts. Her financial worth in 
the United States is significant. Her Indian assets are unlikely to create a conflict of 
interest. She has one friend in India with whom she maintains contact. He is an 
insurance salesman, and does not have ties to the India government that could create a 
concern. Her relationship with him is more than casual and infrequent as his family has 
traveled to the United States and stayed with Applicant. Despite that relationship, it is 
easily mitigated as she has a long-standing sense of loyalty to the United States and 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in its favor. Applicant’s limited foreign 
contact and financial interests are not a security concern. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the foreign influence guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
