                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 13-01344
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on August 21, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  On March 12, 2014
the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on a date uncertain, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on
September 22, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on September 25, 2014.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant failed to submit a response to the FORM.  This case was assigned
to the undersigned on November 20, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 44 years old, and married with one daughter.  He is employed
with a defense contractor as an HVAC Technician and is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  Applicant’s credit report dated September 10, 2013, reflects that the
Applicant is indebted to each of the creditors set forth in the SOR in an amount totaling
approximately $20,633.  (Government Exhibit 9.)  Applicant has been working for his
current employer since November 2012.
Applicant did not provide any explanations as to how or why he became
delinquently indebted.  His credit report confirms that in 2005 he filed for Chapter 7
Bankruptcy.  At that time his delinquent debts were discharged.      
Since then, Applicant has continued to have financial problems.  Eleven
delinquent debts that were either charged-off or placed for collection remain
outstanding.  1.(b) A state tax lien was entered against him in August 2012, in the
approximate amount of $605; 1.(c) A state tax lien was entered against him in June
2012, in the approximate amount of $211; 1.(d) a judgment filed against him in August
2009, in the approximate amount of $4,602; 1.(e) a judgment filed against him in March
2009, in the approximate amount of $3,580; 1.(f) a charged-off auto account in the
amount of $7,427; 1.(g) a charged-off account in the approximate amount of $450; 1.(h)
a charged-off account in the approximate amount of $431; 1.(i ) a collection account in
the approximate amount of $1,446; 1.(j) a collection account in the approximate amount
of $1,177; 1.(k) a collection account in the amount of $603; and, 1.(l) a collection
account in the approximate amount of $101.   
There is no evidence of any payments being made or payment plans set up to
resolve any of the outstanding debts.  When Applicant was questioned about the debts
during his background investigation by an investigator, he stated that he had no
knowledge of most of the debts, but that he would be contacting the creditors to
determine their status.  There is no further information in the record.  
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.  
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
Applicant completed a security clearance application dated August 21, 2013, and
answered, “NO,” to a series of questions concerning his finances.  (Government Exhibit
5.)  Question 26 of the application asked the Applicant if in the last 7 years had he filed
a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy code.  Applicant answered, “NO.”  He
failed to admit that he had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005.  Applicant filed his
Chapter 7 bankruptcy outside of the 7 years and therefore he was not required to
disclose it.  Accordingly, this subparagraph is found for the Applicant.    
Applicant was also asked, in Question 26 of the application, if in the last seven
years, had he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?  If in the last seven
years had he had a credit card suspended, charged-off, or cancelled for failing to pay as
agreed.  If in the past seven years he been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not
previously entered. Is he 120 days delinquent on any debts?  The Applicant answered,
“NO,” to each of the questions.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  These were false responses.
He failed to list the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  (See Applicant’s Answer to
SOR.)  
On the same application, there were questions about his police record.  Question
22 asked him if in the last seven years had he been issued a summons, citation or ticket
to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him.  Applicant was  asked if in the
last seven years, had he been charged, convicted or sentenced for a crime in any court.
He was also asked if he has ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol or
drugs.  The Applicant answered, “NO,” to each of the questions.  (Government Exhibit
5.)  These were false responses.  Applicant failed to list his arrest and conviction for
Illegal Processing of Drug Documents in May 2007.  (See Government Exhibits 5, 7 and
8.)  On this occasion, Applicant was pulled over by the police for running a red light.
The police officer found a doctor’s prescription pad laying on the work truck’s
dashboard.  Applicant had multiple doctor’s prescription pads in his truck.  He claimed
that they were given to him by a foreman from an abandoned doctor’s office work site.
Applicant was subsequently arrested and charged with Illegal Processing of Drug
Documents.  He was found guilty of the charge and was sentenced to 30 days in jail
plus a fine of $310.  (Government Exhibit 8.)   
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator of the Department of
Defense on October 16, 2013.  During the interview, Applicant denied having been
arrested, charged or convicted of any criminal offense, nor being required to attend a
criminal court proceeding in the last seven years.  After being confronted with his
conviction, Applicant provided further false information by stating that he was never
4
charged with any offense, and that the judge at his hearing decided not to charge him
with any criminal offense.  This was a false response.  In 2007, the Applicant was in fact
charged with Illegal Processing of Drug Documents, he pled guilty and was convicted.
(Government Exhibits 7 and 8.) 
During that same interview with the authorized investigator of the Department of
Defense, Applicant deliberately falsified material facts when he denied having any tax
liens, accounts placed for collection, accounts charged off, or any accounts over 120
days delinquent, when in fact he had both tax liens and delinquent accounts as set forth
above.  
Applicant failed to provide any explanation as to why he did not provide the truth
in response to these questions.  It can only be assumed that he deliberately attempted
to falsify the application and sought to conceal the information from the Government.
Furthermore, there is no evidence in the record that demonstrates that his financial
problems are being resolved or are under control.  In the absence of additional
documentary evidence submitted in response to this FORM to show that Applicant has
been able to begin to regain some financial stability by establishing a meaningful track
record of resolving his delinquent debts, this concern must be decided against him in
evaluation of his suitability to have access to classified information.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
5
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities; and
16.(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other
official government representative.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
 
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
6
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility and dishonesty or
conduct that demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In regard to his personal conduct, given his history of criminal conduct,
dishonesty on the security clearance application, and untruthfulness during an interview
with an investigator, the Applicant cannot be found trustworthy.  He intentionally or
deliberately falsified his security clearance application or sought to conceal his financial
history from the Government.  He knew or should have known that he must be truthful in
7
answering questions on the application and in providing information to the Government
about his background during his security clearance investigation.  Since he was not
truthful on the application in response to questions about his finances, his police record,
and during an interview with an investigator, the only reasonable conclusion is that he
deliberately sought to conceal the information from the Government.  
Under Guideline E, (Personal Conduct), Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities; and 16.(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Furthermore, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  The evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
There is a history of financial indebtedness that has not been mitigated.
Applicant must show that he can and will resolve his debts.  In this case, there is no
evidence that he can do so.  He has not shown an ability to pay any of his delinquent
debts or live within his means.  At this time, there is insufficient evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  Applicant has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial
affairs.  Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he is worthy of a security
clearance.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case. Applicant has failed to provide any information as to why he is
delinquently indebted.  There is no evidence in the record to show that he has even
started the process of resolving his debts.  The record is void as to any evidence in
mitigation.  Based upon the evidence in the record, he has a long way to go to
demonstrate that he is fiscally responsible.           
   Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
8
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and his personal conduct, and the effects it can
have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that
the Applicant has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a
security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant
as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:       Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.           Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.b.    Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.    Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.d.               Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.e.   Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.f.    Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.g.    Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.h.    Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.i.    Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.j.    Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.k.    Against the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.l.   Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2:                  Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.          For the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.b.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.c.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.d.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.e.          Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  2.f.          Against the Applicant.
9
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
