KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: A review of the record shows Department Counsel’s conduct was consistent with the
standards of his position.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-00828.a1
DATE: 02/26/2015
DATE: February 26, 2015
In Re:
----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00828
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 26, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
2
Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 9, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert Robinson Gales  denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process; whether
the Judge’s findings contained errors; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline F are not at issue in
this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal.  Applicant
is an employee of a Defense contractor.  Since 2012 he has worked part-time pending receipt of a
security clearance.  From 1986 to his retirement in 2012, Applicant was employed by another
Government agency (AGA), at which he held a top secret clearance with access to sensitive
compartmented information (SCI).  
In 2001, while performing duties for AGA, Applicant used a Government-issued credit card
for personal, unauthorized reasons.  A subsequent investigation substantiated Applicant’s misuse
of the card.  AGA suspended Applicant for three days without pay and placed him on probation for
six months.
Ten years later, again while performing duties for AGA, Applicant misused his Government
credit card.  An investigation revealed that, from 2007 to 2011, he had used the card 223 times for
unauthorized reasons.  Applicant eventually paid off a balance of $9,294.87 in personal charges.
The AGA investigation contained an admission by Applicant that he had withheld his
Government credit card statements from the appropriate authority, in order to prevent discovery of
his misuse.  In his response to the SOR, however, he stated that “there is conflicted information
concerning that in current litigation.”  Decision at 4.  He subsequently claimed that the post office
box to which the statements were to be mailed had relocated several times.
AGA authorities recommended Applicant’s dismissal.  He disputed the allegations against
him and filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) alleging
that he had been a victim of unlawful discrimination.  
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) inquired if, within the previous seven
years, he had been fired from a job.  He answered the question in the negative.  This answer was
false, in that he concealed his 2012 dismissal from employment for misconduct.  He claimed that
an attorney had advised him to answer the question as he did.
Another question on the SCA addressed whether, within the previous seven years, Applicant
had been counseled, disciplined, warned, etc., for violating terms of agreement for a travel card.  He
answered this question in the negative, which was false in light of his repeated misuse of his
3
Government credit card.  Applicant denied intending to mislead anyone, but he acknowledged that
he should have answered the question in the affirmative.
Other SCA questions pertained to Applicant’s financial affairs.  He was asked if, within the
previous seven years, he had had bills turned over to a collection agency; been over 120 days
delinquent on any debt, and if he were currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt.  He answered
the questions in the negative, which was false.  Applicant, in fact, had multiple accounts that were
either placed in collection or were over 120 days delinquent.  Applicant subsequently admitted
having collection accounts, but he denied an intent to mislead.
Applicant has received many certificates of appreciation, superior service, etc.  He enjoys
an excellent reputation for the quality of his work performance as well a his dedication, efficiency,
honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved the Guideline F allegations in Applicant’s favor.  However, he concluded
that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline E.  These concerns involved
his credit card misuse with resulting job termination as well as his false statements on his SCA.  The
Judge stated that Applicant’s position regarding his false statements was not credible.  He stated that
Applicant’s conduct “shows a lack of honesty and integrity.”  Id. at 11.  The Judge concluded that
Applicant’s false answers were a deliberate effort to conceal the truth about his job loss.  He
concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the security concerns arising from his misconduct.
Discussion
Applicant states that he lacked the expertise to present his case in a professional manner.
He argues that he was outmatched by Department Counsel.  However, Applicant received a copy
of the Directive, which included information about his right to counsel.  In addition, the Judge
questioned him at the beginning of the hearing, ascertaining that Applicant understood his rights,
including the right to counsel.  The Judge also elicited information about Applicant’s education and
fluency in English, which were sufficient to have enabled him to represent himself.  Tr. at 6-7.
There is no reason to conclude that Applicant’s pro se representation precluded him from presenting
an adequate case in mitigation.  He has pointed to no evidence that he would have presented but for
his self-representation.  The record discloses no reason to believe that Applicant was denied his
rights under the Directive or that he had not adequately been advised of those rights.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 08-03110 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 2009).  He argues that Department Counsel “berated”
him during the hearing, impugning his trustworthiness and candor.  We have examined the record
as a whole and conclude that Department Counsel did not depart from the standards of zealous
advocacy expected of his position.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-04540 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 19,
2104).  Applicant has not demonstrated that he was denied the due process afforded him by the
Directive. 
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(b): “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or
significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security clearance process.  Upon being made aware of the
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully.”  
4
Applicant argues that the Judge’s findings contain errors.  He notes that he did not retire from
AGA, as the Judge stated at the beginning of his findings.  He also denies that he intentionally
falsified his SCA.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”   Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In evaluating an applicant’s mens
rea, a Judge must consider the false statements or omissions in light of the record as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00142 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2014).  The record supports the Judge’s
findings that Applicant’s false answers were deliberate.  We note the clarity of the questions,
Applicant’s acknowledgment that he should have answered at least some of the questions
differently, and the Judge’s unfavorable credibility determination, to which we give deference.
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
Applicant argues that he answered the questions as he did because of constraints imposed
by litigation resulting from his job termination.  Neither this argument nor the record evidence are
sufficient to justify favorable application of Guideline F Mitigating Condition 17(b).1  See ISCR
Case 12-04540, supra, at 6 (The applicant’s claim that he omitted material information from his
SCA because he was undergoing an administrative appeal of a clearance denial insufficient to raise
MC 17(b)). Among other things, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has
cooperated fully and truthfully once he was made aware of his obligation to cooperate.  The Judge’s
negative credibility determination undermines Applicant’s argument on this issue.  
We agree with Applicant that the Judge erred in stating that he had retired from AGA, insofar
as he was fired.  However, we find no reason to conclude that this error affected the overall decision.
Applicant has cited to no harmful error in the Judge’s findings.  The Judge’s material findings of
security concern are supported by substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could
be drawn from the evidence.
Applicant denies that his circumstances raised concerns under Guideline E.  The Directive
presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an
applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.  14-00114 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 30,
2014).  In the case before us, the Judge found that Applicant had misused his Government credit
card, for which he was fired, and that he made several deliberately false statements on his SCA.  The
Directive provides that failure to provide truthful answers to lawful questions during the processing
of a clearance determination “will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action[.]” Directive
¶ 15.  Applicant’s false statements, along with his other misconduct, are sufficient to persuade a
reasonable person that he has questionable judgment, lacks candor, and may be unwilling to follow
rules and regulations.  Id.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption of nexus.
5
In challenging the Judge’s mitigation analysis, Applicant cites to his testimony to the effect
that the proceedings leading up to his job termination were unfair.  He also cites to evidence that he
has filed a discrimination complaint against AGA with the EEOC.  He argues that this evidence
demonstrates that his conduct was not serious enough to justify denying him a clearance.  The Judge
made findings about this evidence.  In the Analysis, however, he properly noted that the central issue
was Applicant’s conduct rather than the degree of adverse action that he had experienced and that
a DOHA hearing is not a proper forum for addressing Applicant’s complaints against AGA.
Applicant’s arguments about the purported unfairness of the AGA proceedings  do not call into
question the Judge’s findings about his misconduct or his discussion of their significance.  Applicant
also cites to his favorable evidence, such as his good work record.  His arguments are not sufficient
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-04540, supra, at 6.   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jeffrey D. Billett                    
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
