 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00517 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On April 22, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On October 24, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided to Applicant, 
and it was received on December 9, 2014. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d and 1.n. He denied the 
remaining allegations. The admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He married in 1982 and divorced in 1992. He remarried 
in 1992 and has six children, ages 32, 29, 24, 22, 19 and 17. He served in the Army 
from 1983 until 2003, and was honorably discharged. He has been employed with his 
present employer since 2004.  
 
 The SOR alleged a judgment and 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$39,195. It also alleged that Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2004 and had 
his delinquent debts discharged in September 2004. The validity of the debts is 
supported by credit reports.1 
 
Applicant indicated that he paid the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($930) 
through garnishment over a two-month period in 2012. He did not provide documentary 
proof that the judgment is paid, and it is listed as unsatisfied on his credit report dated 
October 23, 2014.2 
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he attempted to negotiate 
settlements or arrange payment plans with the creditors for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($13,915), 1.c ($8,440), and 1.d ($1,522) but was unsuccessful. He did not provide any 
other information regarding his attempt to address these debts, and they remain 
unresolved.  
 
In his answer to the SOR regarding the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($1,125) and 1.m 
($123), Applicant indicated that he was unfamiliar with them. He did not provide any 
information on what actions he may have taken to dispute the debts or otherwise 
resolve them.  
 
 It appears that the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($2,205) and 1.h ($2,205) 
reference the same creditor and same debt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($860) is also owed 
to the same creditor. Applicant denies owing those debts. He did not provide any 
information on efforts he may have taken to dispute or resolve the debts. He did not 
                                                          
1 Items 6 and 7. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt, but admitted it during his 
background interview. 
 
2 Items 4, 5 and 7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
provide documentary proof that he disputed these debts with the creditors or the credit 
bureau.3  
 
It appears the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($2,629), 1.i ($2,073), and 1.j ($1,857) are 
debts owed to the same cell phone carrier and may be duplicate debts. Applicant 
indicated these debts likely belong to his son who has the same name. He did not 
provide any information on efforts he may have taken to resolve the debts. He did not 
provide documentary proof that he disputed these debts with the creditors or with the 
credit bureau.4  
 
Applicant denied the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($1,305), believing he could not 
have incurred a bill this large based on his medical insurance. He did not provide any 
information on efforts he may have taken to resolve the debt. He did not provide 
documentary proof that he disputed the debt with the creditor or with the credit bureau. 
  
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he does not live above his means. He 
has total self-control and is willing to abide by rules and regulations. He is devoted to his 
large family and would never risk losing time with them. Applicant did not provide 
information that his current delinquent debts are attributable to any circumstances 
beyond his control. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
3 Items 3, 6 and 7. 
 
4 Items 3, 6, and 7. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, including a bankruptcy in which his 
debts were discharged in 2004. Currently, he has an unpaid judgment that he is 
unwilling or unable to pay. I have determined that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are 
duplicates and find in his favor for ¶ 1.h. Without further information, I cannot make the 
same determination regarding the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.i and 1.j, as discussed above. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts total approximately $36,990. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant has numerous delinquent debts 
that are not paid or resolved. He had delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004 
giving him a fresh start, and subsequently he has accumulated unpaid debts. 
Insufficient evidence was provided to conclude that his conduct is unlikely to recur. His 
actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Applicant has been employed steadily since 2004. He did not provide information 
that his current delinquent debts are attributable to any circumstances beyond his 
control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant claimed the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a was paid through garnishment, which does not constitute a good-faith resolution. 
The credit report does not support his assertion that the judgment was satisfied. There 
is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling or that his financial 
 
6 
 
 
problems are being resolved or are under control. There is no evidence Applicant has 
paid, resolved, or disputed the debts with the creditors or the credit bureaus, and he has 
not provided evidence to support his claims or resolve his financial problems. AG ¶¶ 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He served in the Army and was honorably discharged. 
He has worked for his present employer since 2004. Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. He had delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004, and since then 
has accumulated approximately $36,990 in unpaid debts. He has not paid any of the 
debts and has not provided information on any current actions he may have taken to 
dispute or resolve the debts. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
