 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03376 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 24, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is alleged to be 
indebted to 18 creditors in the approximate amount of $109,258. Her debts were 
incurred as a result of circumstances beyond her control, but she failed to establish that 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 27, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on October 30, 2014, scheduling the hearing for December 15, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) 
A and B, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. 
The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On December 17, 
2014, and February 5, 2015, Applicant presented two additional exhibits marked AE C 
and AE D. Department Counsel had no objection to AE C or AE D, and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her employer or its predecessors for the past 20 years. She has held a security 
clearance for 20 years and has never had a violation. Her highest level of education 
completed was 9th grade. Applicant is divorced. She has two children and two 
grandchildren. She also supports her sister and brother, who are disabled. (GE 1; Tr. 
37, 42-46.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to 18 creditors in the 
approximate amount of $109,258.1 Applicant admitted all of the debts listed in the SOR 
subparagraphs. Her SOR-listed debts consist of a defaulted mortgage debt, a 
telecommunication debt, a debt owed to an apartment management company, and 
delinquent credit card accounts. All of her debts are found in the credit reports entered 
into evidence. None of her delinquencies have been resolved. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 
4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant attributes her debts to her separation and divorce; costly medical 
conditions of herself and several of her family members; and the death of her mother. 
Applicant was married in September 1997. Applicant originally filed for divorce in 2009, 
but then attempted reconciliation until July 2013, when her ex-husband filed for divorce. 
Her mother, who helped Applicant financially, passed away on an unspecified date 
during this time frame. Applicant’s divorce was finalized in February 2014, after six 
years of failed reconciliation attempts and financial turmoil. Her ex-husband has not 
taken responsibility for any of their marital debt. Recently her ex-husband began to pay 
her $90 per week in child support, as a result of a November 2014 court order, but he 
has provided no other support. Additionally, Applicant’s son and brother inherited a 
debilitating medical condition that requires dialysis three times per week. Applicant has 
the same condition, but does not yet require dialysis. Her sister is disabled. Her minor 
daughter suffers psychological issues as a result of the divorce, and has required 
hospitalization. (Tr. 24-30, 34-35, 38-43, 48-57.) 
 
                                                          
1 SOR allegations 1.f and 1.n may be the same debt reported by different collection agencies on different 
dates. Similarly, SOR allegations 1.e and 1.m appear to be for the same debt. However, Applicant 
admitted each allegation and did not dispute them as inaccurate. 
 
3 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant testified that she had been unable to 
address any of her SOR-listed debts. She made a payment toward hiring a bankruptcy 
attorney in 2009, but never filed a bankruptcy petition. She testified that her attorney 
advised her that she should not file for bankruptcy until her divorce was final. After her 
divorce was finalized in 2014, her focus shifted to recovering from a May 2014 surgery, 
and to fighting for child support in court. She planned to file bankruptcy once she had 
saved the required additional fees. (Tr. 31, 62.) 
 
In her post-hearing exhibits, she presented a letter from her bankruptcy attorney 
indicating that a bankruptcy petition had been filed on her behalf and that a bankruptcy 
hearing was scheduled in March 2015. The attorney neglected to mention the date of 
the filing or under what chapter of code the bankruptcy petition was filed. The letter also 
informed Applicant that she was required to complete financial counseling within 60 
days of the hearing. She failed to provide a copy of the filed bankruptcy petition or proof 
that she completed the financial counseling. It is impossible to discern whether all of the 
SOR-listed debts are included in her bankruptcy petition. (AE D.)  
 
Applicant testified that she no longer uses credit cards. She has never been late 
on her rent. Her expenses match that of her income and she has no savings. Her 
personal financial statement indicated she had $5.82 left after paying her monthly 
expenses, without making any payments on her delinquent accounts. (GE 2; Tr. 68-70.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter of support on Applicant’s behalf. He 
indicated that Applicant is a trustworthy and honest employee. She is rated as “one of 
the top amongst her peers in performance.” (AE C.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in approximately 2009. She has 
a history of debt that she was unable to resolve for this six-year period. The evidence 
raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s substantial delinquent debts are recent and ongoing. She has no 
savings. She only has $5 left at the end of the month after paying her monthly 
obligations. Even if she receives a discharge of all of her debt through bankruptcy, 
future financial problems are likely given her debt to income ratio, and her lack of 
savings. She therefore failed to establish substantial mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under 
MC 20(b). Her financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond her control, 
including: her separation and subsequent divorce; costly medical conditions of herself 
and several of her family members; and the death of her mother. However, she has 
been fully employed during the period she incurred these delinquent debts, and has not 
taken reasonable steps to resolve even the smallest of her debts. She waited until 
February 2015 to file a bankruptcy petition, and it is not known what SOR-listed debts 
are included in that bankruptcy petition or whether those debts will be fully discharged 
through bankruptcy. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible action under the 
circumstances. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant did not undergo financial counseling. She neither documented any 
substantially effective effort to resolve the SOR-listed delinquent debts, nor asserted 
any legitimate basis to dispute their validity. These facts preclude mitigation under MC 
20(c), (d), or (e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
held a security clearance for 20 years, without incident. She served as a government 
contractor for 20 years and is considered trustworthy by her supervisor. Her financial 
difficulties are attributable to her separation and subsequent divorce; costly medical 
conditions of herself and several of her family members; and the death of her mother. 
She is beginning to address her delinquencies by hiring an attorney who has filed 
bankruptcy. The evidence did not include when the petition was filed or which SOR-
listed debts were included. Applicant failed to establish sufficient evidence to show that 
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence is low. At this time, she is not eligible for a 
security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
