1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-00902
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Although Applicant has made some progress in reducing his delinquent debts, it
is too soon to conclude that he has mitigated the security concern, given that he
remains approximately six months behind on his mortgage payments. Clearance is
denied. 
Statement of the Case
On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006.
2
 
 On May 19, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations
except subparagraph 1.e.  He requested a hearing whereupon the case was assigned
to me on November 14, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 10, 2014,
scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the
hearing, I received five Government exhibits (GE 1-GE 5), nine Applicant exhibits (AE A
-AE I), and I considered Applicant’s testimony. 
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, to allow
him to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted two more
exhibits that I incorporated into the record as AE J and AE K. DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) on January 7, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old man with one child, age seven. He and his wife are
separated and in the process of getting a divorce. They share joint custody of their child.
Applicant has a high school diploma and has earned some college credits.
Applicant works for a defense contractor as a senior applications developer. (Tr.
19) His job involves building websites. According to one of his government clients, he is
an outstanding employee who ably resolves design issues and concerns as they arise.
(AE C) According to another government client, Applicant is proactive, and he always
“volunteers for the hard things and isn’t afraid to tackle” major projects. (AE B) 
Since 2008, Applicant has incurred approximately $48,000 of delinquent debt
including delinquent state income taxes (subparagraph 1.a), two delinquent medical
accounts (subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c), a delinquency owed to a college (subparagraph
1.d), a delinquent mortgage (1.f), and two delinquent loans (1.f and 1.g). The tax lien
listed in subparagraph 1.a was for tax year 2011 and totalled $2,176. The lien was
discharged in 2014 after Applicant satisfied it. (AE D) Applicant satisfied the two medical
bills listed in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c, totalling $240, in May 2014. (AE E; Tr. 20-21)
The delinquency owed to the college totals $446 and represents an enrollment
fee that Applicant was supposed to pay when he decided to return to school in
November 2013. He changed his mind a month later and withdrew. (Tr. 21) Under an
agreement with the college, Applicant paid $351 of the $446 balance, and the college
agreed to waive the remainder. (AE G; Tr. 21)
The first of the two loans listed in the SOR (subparagraph 1.f) was procured by
Applicant and his wife when they were together. His estranged wife satisfied this debt in
January 2015. (AE J)
Subparagraph 1.g, totalling $5,000, represents a loan that Applicant obtained in
2008 to pay for wedding expenses. Appellant contends that it has been closed. (Tr. 22)
According to Applicant’s January 2015 credit report, it has been charged off. (Ex. H at
10) 
3
 
Applicant does not attribute the aforementioned delinquent debts to his marital
separation. (Tr. 28) He does attribute his mortgage delinquency to his separation.
Specifically, Applicant and his wife first separated in November 2011. (Tr. 43) Before
she moved, she helped pay the mortgage. Her contribution totalled approximately 20
percent of the mortgage. After she stopped helping with the mortgage, Applicant was
unable to afford the payments, and gradually fell behind. (Tr. 28-29) 
After falling four months behind on the mortgage, Applicant applied for a loan
modification. In April 2012, while the modification was pending approval, Applicant and
his wife reconciled, and she returned to their home. (Tr. 49)  In May 2012, the bank
approved the modification, reducing the interest rate by two percent, and resulting in a
$121 decrease in the monthly mortgage from $2,100 to $1,979. (Tr. 47; AE K at 1-2)
The delinquency was consolidated into the new principal payments.
Applicant made his payments timely for the next seven months. Then, in
December 2012, his wife moved again, causing Applicant to fall behind on his mortgage
the following month. He made no mortgage payments between January 2013 and May
2013. He then applied for another loan modification. In September 2013, the bank
approved the modification, and reduced the monthly mortgage payment to $1,700. (Tr.
50)
Applicant made the modified mortgage payments for the next seven months. In
April 2014, Applicant’s car broke down and he had to spend approximately $2,000 in
repairs. (Tr. 50) He again fell behind on his mortgage payments.
Applicant made no mortgage payments for the next six months. (Tr. 51) He
chose to focus on paying his other bills first. (Tr. 52) In October 2014, he applied for
another loan modification. (AE 7) His application is currently pending. The credit report
that he submitted (AE H) lists his last mortgage payment as March 2014. (AE H at 13)
Applicant contends that he resumed mortgage payments in November 2014 after he
applied for the latest loan modification. (Tr. 41) He provided no supporting documentary
evidence.  
Applicant earns $105,000 per year. (Tr. 55) His budget accounts for a mortgage
payment of $1,979 and indicates that he has approximately $1,619 of monthly
discretionary income. (AE K at 2)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Since 2008, Applicant has incurred approximately $48,000 of delinquent debt.
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant satisfied the debts in subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d, and 1.f. I resolve
these in his favor. The resolution of these debts is sufficient to trigger the application of
AG ¶ 20(d).
Applicant’s difficulties with paying his mortgage stemmed from his marital
problems. His satisfaction of the aforementioned debts, together with his efforts at
modifying the mortgage are sufficient to partially apply AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating
condition is not totally applicable because he remains several months behind on his
5
 
mortgage despite the fact that his budget reveals that he has ample income to make his
mortgage payments.
 ` Applicant continues to struggle with paying his mortgage. There is no record
evidence that he has made any mortgage payments since March 2014. As for the loan
listed in subparagraph 1.g, Applicant contended that it was closed, as opposed to
satisfied, and the most recent credit report lists it as charged off. (AE H) Under these
circumstances, the derogatory security implications of this outstanding debt remain
unchanged.
Given Applicant’s recurrent problems with paying his mortgage and the $5,000
charged-off loan, I cannot conclude that Applicant has his financial situation under
control. AG ¶ 20(c) is inapplicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant is an excellent employee. His most significant financial delinquency, his
mortgage, stems from his separation from his wife, and he has made significant
progress in satisfying his delinquencies. However, his two largest delinquencies, the
mortgage and the wedding loan, remain in delinquent and charge-off status,
respectively. Moreover, it is unclear how he consistently struggles to make mortgage
payments when his budget, accounting for a monthly mortgage payment, indicates that
he has approximately $1,619 of discretionary income. This incongruity creates doubt,
and any doubt must be resolved in favor of the government.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
6
 
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
