 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01783 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana on and off from 1992 to June 2014, including at times while 
she held a Department of Defense security clearance. She falsely denied any illegal drug 
involvement when she applied for a security clearance in October 2013. She no longer 
intends to use any marijuana, but it is too soon to conclude that her marijuana abuse will 
not reoccur. The drug involvement and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. The 
financial considerations concern because of her alleged failure to file her state income tax 
return for tax year 2012 is mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On July 28, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
1
 detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and explaining why it was unable to find that it is 
                                                 
1 
The SOR was issued to Applicant under her maiden name. She recently married, and her new name is 
reflected in the case caption. 
 
 
 2 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security clearance 
eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on August 13, 2014. She requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. On 
October 2, 2014, Applicant’s case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for her. On October 27, 2014, I scheduled a hearing for November 19, 2014. 
 
At the hearing, three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and one Applicant exhibit (AE 
A) were entered into evidence without any objections. Applicant testified on her behalf, as 
reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on December 3, 2014.  
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline H  that Applicant used marijuana approximately 
one to four times monthly from 1991 to December 2013 (SOR 1.a), including after she had 
been granted a DOD security clearance in 2003 (SOR 1.b), and that she expressed an 
intent to continue using marijuana (SOR 1.c). Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly 
falsified her October 16, 2013 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) by not disclosing her drug involvement (SOR 2.a) or that she had used marijuana 
while possessing a security clearance (SOR 2.b). Under Guideline F, Applicant was alleged 
to have failed to file her state income tax return and pay taxes owed for tax year 2012 
(SOR 3.a) as of the issuance of the SOR in July 2014. 
 
In a detailed Answer to the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted the use of 
marijuana between 1991 and December 2013, at times after she had been granted a 
security clearance, but not with the frequency alleged. She explained that there were 
extended periods of time without any marijuana use, including from 1994 to 1996 and while 
pregnant and nursing for a couple of years starting in 2001. Applicant admitted using 
marijuana one to four times per month when she was laid off from her defense contractor 
employment. Applicant denied that she had expressed intent to continue using marijuana 
indefinitely in the future. Concerning the alleged falsification of her e-QIP, Applicant 
acknowledged that she had lied because she was afraid she would lose her job. However, 
she volunteered her drug use at the start of her personal subject interview. About the state 
tax issue, Applicant indicated that she filed her 2012 state tax return on January 11, 2014, 
and paid the taxes owed on April 8, 2014, before the SOR was issued. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to some illegal drug involvement and to the falsification of 
her October 2013 security clearance application are accepted and incorporated as findings 
 
 3 
of fact. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old high school graduate with some college and woodworking 
training. She has worked as a carpenter for her current employer, a defense contractor, on 
and off since March 2003. Applicant was laid off due to lack of work and then recalled 
several times over the next 11 years. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 19-21.) 
 
Applicant married a Nigerian citizen in July 2014. (Tr. 31.) They have a son, who 
was born in the United States in November 2001. Applicant sponsored her spouse’s 
immigration to the United States, and he entered on a fiancé visa in June 2014. (GEs 1, 2; 
Tr. 44.) 
 
Applicant started using marijuana in 1992, when she began working in promotions at 
a local casino. In 1993, she began using marijuana regularly, about once a week. She 
continued to use the drug with varying frequency until June 2014, on average once every 
few months, but at other times up to four times per month. She had some periods of 
abstinence varying from several months to two years. (GE 3; Tr. 24-26, 30-31.) Applicant 
used marijuana with friends, and she purchased the drug on occasion. (Tr. 30.) At times, 
she also operated a motor vehicle after smoking marijuana. (Tr. 41.) 
 
Around 1995, Applicant tested positive for cannabis in a random drug screen. She 
was told by her employer, a casino, to seek treatment as a condition of her continued 
employment. Applicant attended weekly counseling between June 1995 and December 
1995, but she did not consider it treatment. (GEs 1, 2; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
Applicant resumed using marijuana with friends around 1997. (Tr. 28.) In October 
1998, Applicant began working in customer service or phone sales. She attended college 
for visual arts for one semester, from December 1998 to June 1999. Her recreational use 
of marijuana continued until March 2001. She abstained from marijuana while pregnant 
and then nursing her son. (GEs 2, 3.) 
 
On March 11, 2003, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a security 
clearance application (SF 86) to work for her current employer. Applicant responded 
negatively to question 27 concerning whether she had illegally used any controlled 
substance, including marijuana, in the last seven years. (GE 2.) She was not using 
marijuana at that time, but she had smoked marijuana within the last seven years, and she 
knew that her denial of any drug use was false. (Tr. 29.) Applicant was granted a secret-
level security clearance around October 2003. (GE 1; Tr. 22.) Applicant resumed using 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance. Applicant knew that illegal drug use while 
possessing a security clearance was prohibited, but she felt her marijuana use did not 
affect her job or threaten her clearance. (Tr. 32.) There were times when Applicant 
reported to work for the defense contractor after she had smoked marijuana, although she 
never used it at work. (Tr. 41-42.) 
 
 
 4 
Applicant was laid off from her defense contractor job from November 2006 to 
February 2007, from April 2010 to June 2010, and from November 2011 to October 2012. 
Applicant worked as a home companion from May 2012 to October 2012, but during 
previous periods of layoff, she supported herself and her son on her unemployment 
benefits. (GEs 1, 3.) Applicant did not have taxes withheld from her unemployment 
compensation income in 2012, so when it came time to file her state income tax return in 
2013, she owed taxes that she could not pay. (Tr. 22.) 
 
When recalled to work by the defense contractor in October 2012, Applicant was 
detailed until December 2012 to a military shipyard. (GE 3.) On October 18, 2013, 
Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP to renew her security clearance eligibility. She 
responded negatively to inquiries concerning any illegal drug use in the last seven years 
and any illegal drug use ever while possessing a security clearance. She feared the loss of 
her employment if she disclosed her marijuana use. Applicant responded “Yes” to whether 
she had ever had counseling or treatment as a result of illegal drug use. She explained that 
she received treatment from June 1995 to December 1995 for marijuana use after she 
failed a random drug test while working at a casino. Applicant also responded affirmatively 
to inquiry concerning whether she had failed to file or pay any federal, state, or other taxes. 
She indicated that she had not filed her state income tax return or paid $500 in overdue 
state income taxes for 2012 due to being laid off.
2
 She expressed a plan to pay the tax 
debt in full. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant completed her e-QIP with the help of someone in her employer’s security 
office. Applicant submitted her e-QIP knowing that she had concealed her marijuana use 
that occurred in the last seven years, and that she had used it while she held a DOD 
clearance. She regretted her lies because she had wanted to be upfront. (Tr. 45-46.) The 
next morning, she contacted her security office at work and indicated that she wanted to 
make a correction to her form, although she did not reveal what she wanted to change. 
Applicant was apparently told there was nothing she could do because her form had been 
submitted to the DOD. (Tr. 33, 39.) Applicant did not tell anyone in the security office about 
her marijuana use. (Tr. 38.) Applicant claims that some co-workers know about her drug 
use, but when asked for specifics, she responded, “Well, I’d rather not name names.” (Tr. 
38.) 
 
Applicant was laid off on November 12, 2013, because of a lack of work. She used 
marijuana more frequently, up to four times a month, to cope with the stresses of waiting 
for her spouse’s immigration and of her job layoff. (Tr. 40.) 
 
On December 11, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator. (GE 3.) Applicant told the investigator upfront that she 
wanted to correct the record regarding her marijuana use. (Tr. 33.) They reviewed her e-
QIP, and concerning the drug inquiries, Applicant “offered information regarding marijuana 
                                                 
2 
Applicant’s state income tax return for tax year 2012 would have been due in 2013. She was working full time 
for the defense contractor when that return would have been due. Applicant had been unemployed the 
previous spring, from November 2011 to May 2012, when she began working as a home companion until 
recalled to her defense contractor employment in October 2012. 
 
 5 
use.” She indicated that she first used marijuana in the summer 1991 and that she last 
used it in December 2013. Applicant described the frequency of her marijuana use as one 
to four times per month, although she recalled abstaining from March 2001 to 
approximately 2003. She admitted that she obtained her security clearance when she was 
using marijuana. When asked whether she planned to continue to use marijuana, 
Applicant, who was laid off at the time, admitted that she had no plan at that time to cease 
her recreational use. (GE 3; Tr. 37.) Applicant denied that she could be blackmailed or 
coerced about her marijuana use. Her siblings knew about it. Apart from the counseling 
advised by the casino in 1995, Applicant denied adverse consequences of her drug abuse. 
Regarding her listed state income tax delinquency, Applicant explained that she had found 
it difficult to pay the debt because of being laid off. (GE 3.) 
 
 As of April 8, 2014, Applicant had filed her delinquent state income tax return for 
2012 and made payments totaling $1,399.60 to resolve her state income tax debt.
3
 (AE A; 
Tr. 23.) Applicant filed her income tax return for 2012 with her timely return for 2013. (Tr. 
23.) 
 
Applicant was recalled to work by the defense contractor in January 2014, only to be 
laid off again from April 2014 to June 2014. Applicant used marijuana on at least two 
occasions after January 2014, including in June 2014 while she was visiting a friend. (Tr. 
30-31, 35.) Marijuana had helped Applicant cope with feelings of anxiety in the past, and 
she smoked the drug to treat the anxiety caused by the potential loss of her employment 
should she be denied security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 35.) Applicant last purchased 
marijuana in December 2013. (Tr. 42.) 
 
Applicant was recalled to work in June 2014. (Tr. 21.) She does not intend to use 
marijuana in the future. Her spouse does not use any marijuana. He knows Applicant has 
used marijuana, and he does not want her to use the drug. (Tr. 31, 38.) As of mid-
November 2014, Applicant did not have any marijuana in her home, and she had found 
alternatives to marijuana, such as meditation, to cope with her anxiety. (Tr. 31, 38.) 
Applicant has told the friend, who was involved in her June 2014 marijuana use, that she 
does not intend to use marijuana again because her spouse disapproves and because of 
the concern about her security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 43.) Applicant’s job is very 
important to her. Her income supports the family while her spouse is looking for work. (Tr. 
46.) 
 
Applicant has not been suspended or reprimanded while working for her defense 
contractor employer. She has not committed any violations of security procedures. (Tr. 43.) 
                                                 
3 
Applicant indicated when she responded to the SOR that she filed her delinquent state income tax return for 
2012 on January 11, 2014, and that she satisfied her state tax debt on April 8, 2014. She discrepantly testified 
at her hearing that she filed her return and paid her state tax debt on the same day, April 8, 2014. (Tr. 23.) She 
provided documentation showing payment on April 8, 2014. (AE A.) Whether she submitted her return in 
January 2014 or April 2014, it has been filed. 
 
 6 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
 7 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
4
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant abused marijuana with 
varying frequency over the years from 1992 to June 2014. There were times where she 
abstained completely, such as when she was pregnant and nursing her son, but there were 
other times when she used marijuana up to four times a month. The evidence establishing 
AG ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use,” is limited to a positive random drug 
screen in 1995, which led to six months of counseling to keep her job at the casino. AG ¶ 
25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” applies because Applicant 
purchased marijuana on occasion, including as recently as December 2013. Furthermore, 
whereas Applicant used marijuana while she held a security clearance, knowing that such 
illegal drug use is prohibited, AG ¶ 25(g), any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance,” is also implicated.  
 
The SOR also alleged that Applicant expressed intent to continue to use marijuana 
(SOR 1.c). When she answered the SOR in August 2014, Applicant denied that she had 
expressed intent to continue using marijuana “indefinitely.” However, she admits that she 
had told the OPM investigator in December 2013 that she had no immediate plan to cease 
her marijuana use. The evidence shows that she used marijuana in June 2014, which is 
consistent with that intent. AG ¶ 25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or 
failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use,” applies, although 
Applicant testified credibly in November 2014 that she has not used marijuana since June 
2014 and no longer intends to use it in the future. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
clearly not implicated. Notwithstanding periods of abstention lasting as long as two years at 
                                                 
4
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 8 
times, Applicant’s marijuana involvement cannot reasonably be characterized as 
infrequent. She used marijuana over a span of 22 years, at times recreationally with 
friends. She also used the drug to cope with anxiety. She used it as often as four times per 
month at times, including in late 2013 when she was laid off and anxious about her 
spouse’s pending immigration and her lack of employment. Furthermore, Applicant used 
marijuana with a friend as recently as June 2014, which was not “so long ago.” 
 
Under mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any 
drugs in the future” may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) is partially established in that Applicant’s circumstances have changed 
since her last use of marijuana in June 2014. Most notably, her spouse immigrated to the 
United States in June 2014, and they married in July 2014. Applicant’s spouse does not 
use marijuana, and he does not want Applicant to use the drug. Applicant has not shown 
that she has completely disassociated herself from the friends with whom she used 
marijuana. However, Applicant has informed the friend, who used the drug with her in June 
2014, of her intent not to use any marijuana in the future. Applicant has not executed a 
signed statement of intent acknowledging that her security clearance would be revoked for 
any illegal drug use. However, under the advisement of potential criminal penalties for any 
false statement, she testified credibly that she does not intend to use any illegal drug in the 
future.  
 
Applicant’s willingness to commit to a drug-free lifestyle is evidence in reform. 
Nevertheless, after considering the recency of her resolve to cease her drug involvement, I 
find that the Government has legitimate concerns about whether Applicant will be able to 
abide by her stated intent. Her present abstinence of five months as of her hearing is very 
brief in comparison with her two decades of recreational drug use. She abstained for 
lengthier periods in the past only to resume using marijuana. Applicant used marijuana 
despite holding a security clearance and knowing that such drug use is prohibited. 
Applicant has used marijuana at times to cope with anxiety. While she has found 
meditation to be helpful of late, it is too soon to conclude that her drug abuse is safely in 
the past and will not reoccur. A longer period of abstinence is required for me to find that 
the drug involvement concerns are fully mitigated. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
 9 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant does not dispute that she deliberately falsified her October 2013 e-QIP 
when she responded negatively to whether she had used any illegal drug in the last seven 
years and whether she had ever used any illegal drug while possessing a security 
clearance. AG ¶ 16(a) applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Furthermore, given that she feared the loss of her employment if she disclosed her 
marijuana use, AG ¶ 16(e) is also implicated: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
Although Applicant denied to the OPM investigator in December 2013 that she could be 
blackmailed or coerced because of her marijuana use, she admitted that she did not inform 
anyone in her security office about her drug use when she sought to rectify her false 
responses on the e-QIP. Applicant claimed that some co-workers know about her drug use, 
but when pressed, she responded, “Well, I’d rather not name names.” She acknowledged 
that no one in the security department knew about her marijuana use. 
 
 About Applicant’s attempt to rectify the record the day after she submitted her e-QIP 
in October 2013, it falls short of satisfying mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(a), “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts,” when she did not identify for security personnel the 
nature of her desired correction. Applicant’s disclosures of her marijuana involvement 
during her December 2013 OPM interview were without confrontation.  To the extent that 
this rectification qualifies as a good-faith correction under AG ¶ 17(a), it was not sufficiently 
prompt when considering other evidence of record. Applicant concealed her marijuana use 
from the DOD when she initially applied for a security clearance in March 2003. She was 
granted a DOD secret-level security clearance around October 2003, apparently based on 
her false denial of any illegal drug use in the preceding seven years, and she made no 
effort to correct the record for the next 10 years. 
 
 10 
 
 Applicant had a clear opportunity to come forward about her illegal drug involvement 
when she completed her October 2013 e-QIP to renew her security clearance eligibility. 
Instead, she repeated her initial falsification and concealed her drug use. Although the 
Government did not allege the falsification of her initial SF 86, the DOHA Appeal Board has 
consistently held that non-alleged conduct may be considered to assess an applicant’s 
credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant had demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is 
applicable; or to provide evidence for a whole-person analysis under Section 6.3 of the 
Directive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012); ISCR Case No. 
03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). The recurrence of the falsification makes it difficult to 
mitigate the October 2013 e-QIP falsification under AG ¶ 17(c): 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 In her favor, Applicant acknowledges that she falsely concealed her use of 
marijuana when she completed both security clearance applications. She is remorseful 
about that conduct. She took positive steps to address the judgment concerns raised by 
her October 2013 e-QIP falsification by coming forward about her drug involvement during 
her December 2013 OPM interview. These steps in reform implicate AG ¶ 17(d): 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
By informing the DOD about her marijuana use, Applicant has also taken a positive step to 
minimize her vulnerability to coercion under AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” Yet, 
Applicant’s motivation in the falsifications was to protect her employment. She was not 
forthcoming with security personnel about the change that she wanted to make to her e-
QIP in October 2013, and there is no evidence that her employer knows that she engaged 
in prohibited illegal drug use while holding a position of trust. The risk of Applicant 
concealing relevant facts to keep her job, and of vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
or duress because of such concealment, is not fully mitigated. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 11 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 The evidence establishes that Applicant did not file her state income tax return or 
pay her state tax debt when due for tax year 2012. She did not have taxes taken out of her 
unemployment income when she was out of work during the first quarter of 2012, which led 
to her incurring a state tax liability for 2012. When her return came due in 2013, she chose 
not to file. Two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required 
or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 apply in whole or in part: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Whereas Applicant’s state income tax return and tax payment for 2012 were due in 
2013, her failure to comply with her tax obligations cannot reasonably be characterized as 
“behavior [that] happened so long ago.” Yet, it was infrequent under AG ¶ 20(a) in that it 
was isolated to tax year 2012. Applicant has otherwise filed her returns on time. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established in that the tax debt was incurred because of 
unemployment following a job layoff. AG ¶ 20(b) does not mitigate the concern raised by 
Applicant’s failure to file her state tax return on time, however. The evidence shows that 
Applicant had been recalled to work by the defense contractor when her return for 2012 
should have been filed. Applicant had a legal obligation to file her income tax return on 
time, independent of whether she could not afford to pay the taxes owed. However, AG ¶ 
20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) are satisfied by Applicant’s filing of her delinquent state income tax 
 
 12 
return for 2012 on April 8, 2014, and by her payment of her outstanding tax liability at that 
time. The financial considerations concern is mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
5
 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in abusing marijuana while holding a sensitive 
position with a defense contractor. Applicant knew that it was prohibited conduct, but she 
felt her use of marijuana did not adversely affect her job performance or her security 
clearance. Applicant exhibited an unacceptable tendency to put her interests first, whether 
by using marijuana or by lying about that use to protect her job. Applicant’s disclosure of 
her marijuana involvement to the OPM investigator in December 2013 only partially averts 
the negative implications for her security worthiness. 
 
Security clearance decisions are not intended as punishment for past wrongdoing. 
At the same time, once a security concern arises, there is a strong presumption against the 
grant or continuation of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 
1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). For the reasons discussed under 
Guidelines H and E, supra, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                                                 
5
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 13 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
