1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01040
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 26, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on October 24, 2013.  On August 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 9, 2014.  He
answered the SOR in writing on September 19, 2014, and requested a hearing before
an Administrative Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
received the request soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on October
27, 2014.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing that same day, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on November 24, 2014.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1
through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf,
2
as did his estranged wife, and submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, which was received without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on December 4, 2014.  I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until December 24, 2014, to submit
additional matters.  On December 24, 2014, he submitted Exhibit B.  On January 12,
2015, Department Counsel noted no objection.  As the undersigned was on leave from
January 12~18, 2015, and January 19, 2015 was a Federal Holiday, the record closed
on January 20, 2015.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information
to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant, a 52-year old naturalized citizen, holds a Bachelor’s Degree from a
foreign university.  (TR at page 16 line 11 to page 17 line 5.)  He has worked for his
current employer for about “10 years,” and has held a security clearance since 2007.
(TR at page 17 lines 6~12, and GX 1 at pages 43~44.)  He has never had a security
clearance violation.  (TR at page 17 lines 15~22.)  He is pending divorce from his
estranged spouse, and attributes his past-due indebtedness to their legal separation.
(TR at page 18 line 24 to page 20 line 24, and at page 21 line 3 to page 26 line 7.)
1.a.  Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in January of
2011.  (TR at page 26 line 13 to page 28 line 7.)  However, as he thought this
bankruptcy might affect his security clearance, he did not follow through with the
bankruptcy; and as a result, if was dismissed in February of 2011.  (Id.)
1.b.~1.o.  Applicant admits to these 14 debts owed to 12 different creditors (1.d.
and 1.f. are to the same creditor, and 1.i. and 1.o. are to the same creditor) in an
amount totaling in excess of $85,000.  At his November 2014 hearing Applicant averred
“I’m going to start contacting them right away, but I think that by January [2015] - the
beginning of February time frame, I will be able to start making payments on them.”  (TR
at page 40 lines 19~23.)  However, his estranged spouse, who is also an attorney,
testified that they may again file for the protection of bankruptcy.  (TR at page 50 line 1
to page 51 line 7.)  Finally, although it is not considered testimony, in Applicant’s
December 2014 “Closing Argument;” (CA) he now cites his state’s code of civil
procedure, without any attachment, averring that these debts were “charged off and . . .
[are] time barred by the four year Statute of Limitations for contractual debts” from
collection.  It is clear to the undesigned that Applicant has absolutely no intention of
making a good-faith effort to address these admitted debts.
1.p.  Applicant admits a debt to Creditor P in the amount of about $2,169.  At his
hearing, he averred wanted “to settle” this debt.  (TR at page 32 line 13 to page 33 line
3
9.)  In his CA, Applicant avers he is “currently in the process of resolving this debt” but
has submitted nothing further in this regard.  I find that this admitted debt is still past
due.
1.q.  Applicant admits a debt to Creditor Q in the amount of about $119.  At his
hearing, he averred that he “settled” this debt and would forward documentation
supporting his averment.  (TR at page 33 line 10 to page 34 line 4.)  In his CA, Applicant
avers it is “paid,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard.  I find that this
admitted debt is still past due.
1.r.  Applicant admits a debt to Creditor R in the amount of about $100.  At his
hearing, he averred that this medical bill of his estranged spouse is “being disputed.”
(TR at page 34 lines 5~22, and 44 line 11 to page 45 line 15.)  In his CA, Applicant
avers that “my estranged wife is either going to pay or dispute” the debt, but has
submitted nothing further in this regard.  I find that this admitted debt is still past due.
1.s.  Applicant initially admitted this debt to Creditor S in the amount of about
$94.  He and his estranged now dispute this debt.  (TR at page 35 lines 4~22, and at
page 45 line 16 to page 46 line 1.)  As Applicant has submitted nothing further in this
regard, such as a dispute letter, I find that this admitted debt is still past due.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past-due debts,
which he has not yet resolved.
I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.  Although
Applicant can attribute his past-due debts to his pending divorce, he has failed to act
“responsibly under the circumstances,” as required by Subparagraph 20(b) with respect
5
to his debts.  Furthermore, Subparagraph 20(d) requires that “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  Other than his
bare averments, Applicant has yet to credibly address his past-due debts totaling in
excess of $87,000.  Accordingly, Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Applicant is well thought of in the work
place.  (AppXs A and B.)  However, the record evidence leaves me with questions and
doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  Applicant has over
$87,000 in past-due indebtedness that he has yet to address.  For these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person
concept arising from his Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
6
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
