1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-02889
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 17, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On July 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E for Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on August 12, 2014, and he
requested that his case be decided by a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The
case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on September 30, 2014. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 9, 2014,
and I convened the hearing, as scheduled on November 12, 2014. The Government
offered Exhibit 1, which was received without objection. Applicant testified on his own
behalf and submitted Exhibits A and B, which were also admitted without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on November 20, 2014. Based upon a
2
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, as described
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is married for the second time, and he has four
children. Applicant received a Bachelor of Science degree in 2005 in Electrical
Engineering. Since 2005, Applicant has been employed as a Senior Systems Engineer
by his present employer, a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) under Adjudicative Guideline
H. 
1.a. The SOR alleges, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR, that he, “used
marijuana approximately four times between 2009 and 2010, while holding a security
clearance.” At the hearing, Applicant testified that these were the dates he put on his
Security Clearance Application (SCA) on April 3, 2013. (Exhibit 1.) Upon further
reflection and review of his calendar, he believes that all four uses of the marijuana
occurred in 2009. He averred that he never used marijuana, or any other drug, before
2009, or after that year.  (Tr at 24-36.) 
Applicant testified that at the time of his marijuana use he was going through a
very difficult period. His brother was undergoing melanoma treatment, including the
removal of part of his lymph nodes, his ear lobe, a rib, and part of his hip. In 2009, he
also became aware that his first wife has been unfaithful to him and she began divorce
proceedings. During this period, a friend, to whom he reached out for comfort, offered
him marijuana. Applicant made it clear that he had not requested the marijuana from
this friend. (Tr at 26-30.) Since that time, he has only seen this friend one additional
time at her wedding, four years ago. Applicant testified that his current wife does not
use illegal drugs, and he does not knowingly associate with anyone else who uses
illegal drugs.  When Applicant was asked whether there was any chance he would use
marijuana in the future, he stated, “Absolutely not. There is no way I would risk my
family’s future for something that stupid.”(Tr at 34-36.)  
Applicant testified that when he used the marijuana, he was not sure of the legal
status of marijuana for the state in which he used it. He stated that he had not
considered its illegal status under Federal law or that it was barred for use by anyone
holding a security clearance, although he conceded that he should have been aware.
(Tr at 32-33.) 
3
The Government’s information about Applicant’s marijuana usage came solely
from Applicant when he completed his SCA and spoke to a Government investigator.
(Tr at 44-45.) (Exhibit 1.)  
Applicant submitted a signed statement (Exhibit B), in which he wrote: 
        I have never (outside of the instances listed) used or condoned the
use by others of any drugs. 
I have no interest in ever again using drugs of any sort (regardless
of any future changes of legality).
I agree that should I ever again use an illegal drug of any sort, it
should result in my immediate loss of any clearances.
The situation which existed at that time is the only reason that I
made the mistakes I did, I have grown and matured since.  
Finally, Applicant testified that he has developed new coping mechanisms
including counseling, becoming more active in his church and developing some closer
friendships, so that if he ever found himself in a high stress situation again, he would not
turn to illegal drugs.  (Tr at 47-48.) 
1.b. The SOR alleges, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR, that he,
“purchased marijuana between 2009 and 2010, while holding a security clearance.” At
the hearing, Applicant testified that he received his DoD security clearance shortly after
he began working for his current employer, in late 2005 or early 2006. (Tr at 25-26.)  He
stated that he only purchased marijuana one time from the friend who had offered it to
him, and he gave the friend $20 for this one purchase. The marijuana that he purchased
was enough for the four times he used marijuana in 2009, referred to in 1.a., above. (Tr
at 30-32.) 
1.c. The SOR alleges, and Applicant has admitted in his RSOR, that in April
2013, he told a Government investigator that he did not use all of the marijuana he
purchased, and it could still be in his home. Applicant testified that after he made that
statement to the investigator, he asked his current wife about the marijuana. She
informed him that she had come across the marijuana and she threw it away. (Tr at 33-
34.) 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness. 
 
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s conduct as set forth in paragraph 1.,
above constitutes disqualifying conduct under this Guideline.  
4
Mitigation
Applicant submitted six extremely positive and laudatory character letters from
individuals who know him in his professional capacity. (Exhibit A.) Typical of all of the
letters is one in which he was described as “trustworthy, dependable and honest.” Also
he was described as someone with “judgement, integrity and trustworthiness.” 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG ¶ 24:  
      Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgement and because it raises questions about a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, specifically the use of marijuana on four
occasions in 2009, while he was holding a security clearance, is of great concern,
especially in light of his continued desire to have access to the nation's secrets.
Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within
Drug Involvement ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse” and (c) “illegal drug possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution.” 
However, I find credible his testimony and his written statement that he intends to
abstain from using marijuana or any illegal drug in the future. I also considered that
Applicant only used an illegal drug four times during the most stressful period of his life,
and his testimony that he would know better how to cope with any potential severe
stress in the future. Additionally, the fact that Applicant revealed his drug usage on a
security clearance application and to a Government investigator without any apparent
outside source is significant. Finally, I considered the positive and laudatory character
letters, which make Applicant’s stated intentions to never use illegal drugs again more
credible and convincing.  Therefore, I conclude that ¶ 26(a) is applicable since “the
behavior . . . was so infrequent” and “happened under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur.”  Also, ¶ 26(b) “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future,” including (3) “an appropriate period of abstinence;” and (4) “a signed statement
of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation,” is applicable and
mitigating.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has used illegal drugs under Guideline H. Applicant, on the other hand, has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation, which is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case against him.  Accordingly, Guideline H of the SOR is
concluded for Applicant.
6
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
         The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, unreliability,
and untrustworthiness.  
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude that
Applicant’s marijuana usage in 2009, as reviewed above, is a concern to the
Government under Guideline E. However, based on all of the evidence introduced
during the hearing, I find that his conduct does not “support a whole-person assessment
of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, . . . and unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.” Therefore, I do not find any disqualifying condition
applies against Applicant under ¶ 16. I do find that mitigating condition ¶ 17(c)  is
applicable because “so much time has passed” and “it [the conduct]  is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” I, therefore, resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating conditions are applicable and controlling, I find that the
record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
