1
                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02628
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 24, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge:
Applicant is indebted to nine creditors on delinquent accounts totaling $96,297.
He demonstrated little effort to resolve his delinquencies. The evidence is insufficient to
mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on December 17,
2013. On August 18, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
1Applicant’s defaulted mortgage is not alleged on the SOR. It was resolved through short sale.
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 19, 2014 (Answer), and
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on
December 2, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Notice of  Hearing on December 11, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled,
on January 12, 2015. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE)
1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits
(AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own
behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until January 22, 2015, for
submission of documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
on January 20, 2015. Applicant timely submitted AE C through G, which were admitted
without objection and the record closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since 2007. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2002. He is married, with
one minor child. He was a civilian employee working for the Air Force from 2002 to
2007. He has held a security clearance since 2002. (GE 1; Tr. 24, 31-33.) 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations concerning
delinquent debts set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. (Answer.) Applicant’s admissions
are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant’s credit bureau reports substantiate the existence of all of the
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. His documented delinquencies comprise 9 debts
totaling $96,297, which he failed to pay over the past six years. They include a personal
loan and eight delinquent credit cards. He did not document any payment toward, or
basis to dispute, any of these debts. He claimed that “all the creditors on the record that
are delinquent were charged off.” (AR; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 56, 66-67.)
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to spending beyond his means, a failed
real estate investment partnership, and his wife’s unemployment. He admitted, “We
thought we were rich,” and “had spending habit trouble.” (Tr. 27, 65.) Applicant
purchased his residence in 2004. In 2006 Applicant invested in two homes through a
partnership with his wife’s sisters. All three properties were short sold between 2007
and 2010. Applicant took responsibility for his decision to default on his home mortgage
and maximize his credit cards to their limits in an effort to make payments on his real
estate investments.1 (Tr. 25-30, 35-49.)
In May 2014 Applicant contacted a credit repair service to help him address his
SOR-listed debts. In November 2014 he paid the credit repair service $500 to begin
utilizing their services. He anticipates that the service will help him settle each debt or
remove it from his credit report within the next six months. He failed to present any
documentation to show that the credit repair service has taken any concrete actions on
3
his debts, despite their proposal to do so. Applicant testified he has not had any
financial counseling. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; Tr. 58-62.) 
Applicant has received a number of workplace honors and awards, including:
three special recognition awards; three spot awards; and an external award. (AE F.) He
provided a list of the security courses he has completed. (AE E.) He submitted no
character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
4
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The record evidence potentially raises security concerns under two Guideline F
DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant accrued $96,297 in delinquent debts over the past six years, and
demonstrated neither the means nor a reasonable effort to resolve them. This evidence
raised security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s nine SOR-listed delinquent debts are recent and ongoing, without
indication that the circumstances under which they arose have changed. He therefore
failed to establish substantial mitigation under MC 20(a). 
Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under
MC 20(b). While his wife’s unemployment could be considered a condition beyond his
control, his debts were largely due to overspending and poor financial decision making.
He has been fully employed during the period he incurred substantial delinquent debts,
and has not taken steps to show he acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Applicant did not undergo financial counseling. He neither documented any
substantially effective effort to repay or otherwise resolve any of the SOR-listed
delinquent debts, nor asserted a legitimate basis to dispute their validity. He recently
contacted a credit repair company to assist him in negotiating and removing his debts
from his credit report, however, his recent actions do little to demonstrate a good-faith
commitment to resolve the delinquencies. These facts preclude significant mitigation
under MC 20(c), (d), or (e). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred substantial
delinquent indebtedness on a personal loan and eight credit cards that he has made no
effort to repay, despite his recent hiring of a credit repair company. These debts remain
outstanding, creating the ongoing potential for pressure and duress. The evidence does
not support a finding that continuation or recurrence are unlikely, or that behavioral
changes demonstrate rehabilitation. He is a mature and experienced individual who is
accountable for his choices and financial irresponsibility. Overall, the record evidence
creates ongoing doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN
Administrative Judge
