                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-02179
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Attorney At Law
 Griffith, Young & Lass
February 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on February 11, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1). On July 29, 2014, the
Department of  Defense (DOD) pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 9, 2014, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on October 27, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued that same
day, scheduling the hearing for December 3, 2014.  The Government offered one exhibit,
referred to as Government Exhibit 1, which was received without objection.  The
2
Applicant presented twenty-nine exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through
CC, which were admitted into evidence without objection.  She also testified on her own
behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on December 15, 2014.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in India.  (See Tr. p. 17.)  There was no
objection from Applicant.  (See Tr. p. 17.)  The request and the attached documents
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.  The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 29 years of age and married.  She has two
Bachelor of Science degrees, one in Technical Management, the other in Electronics
and Communications.  She is employed as a Test Engineer by a defense contractor and
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise of
classified information.
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  She has
been working for her current employer since June 2013.  She has received a number of
awards and recognitions as well as a pay raise since beginning her employment.
Applicant has never applied for or held a security clearance before.  
Applicant was born in India in 1985.  She grew up in India, and attended college
there, where she earned her Bachelor’s of Engineering in Electronics and
Communication.  Her uncle, who lived in the United States, had told her about the quality
of life and the great opportunities available here.  Applicant knew that she wanted to
move to the United States to become a successful engineer, establish herself, and live
the good life.  (Tr. pp. 41-42.)  In April 2006, Applicant immigrated to the United States
with her parents and younger brother.  Her older sister also wanted to come to the
United States, but was unable to since she was over the age of 21, and precluded from
doing so, according to the immigration laws.  
3
Not long after arriving in the United States, by June 2009, Applicant had obtained
her Bachelor’s of Science in Technical Management.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  She
became a naturalized United States citizen in June 2011.  (Tr.p. 64.)  She formally
renounced her Indian citizenship in November 2011.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  She
obtained her drivers license, and an American passport that she uses to travel outside of
the United States.  Since immigrating here, she has traveled to India on three occasions
to visit.  Each time, she used her American passport.  (Applicant’s Exhibits C and D.)  
Applicant currently resides in the United States with her parents and her brother
who are all United States citizens.  She now has about twelve extended family members
who reside in the United States that include her husband, her mother, her father, her
brother, her uncle, her uncle’s wife and their two sons, her grandmother, and her father’s
sister’s family or her aunt, her aunt’s husband, their son, their son’s wife and their
daughter.  (Tr. p. 62 and Applicant’s Exhibits F, G and H.)  All of her family members are
United States citizens, except three.  (Tr.p. 63.)    
    
Applicant’s older sister is a citizen and resident of India.  She is currently being
sponsored by the Applicant and Applicant’s father to come to the United States.  In the
beginning, Applicant spoke to her sister in India a couple of times a month.  After her
sister got married and started her own family, Applicant’s contact with her sister became
less frequent to once every three weeks or so.  (Tr. p. 47.)  They talk about casual
matters, and nothing related to Applicant’s work.  Applicant’s sister has no affiliation with
the Indian Government.  (Tr. p. 48.)  She is a housewife and she has one son.  Her
husband is a marketing manager who has no affiliation with the Indian Government.
Applicant may speak to him when she calls her sister on holidays.      
In March 2012, Applicant got married to an Indian citizen, in India.  Her husband
came to the United States on an immigrant visa in February 2013.  Applicant’s husband
now holds a green card and a permanent residency card.  After three years, in February
2016, he will apply to be a naturalized citizen of the United States.  ( Tr. p. 50.)  After
Applicant’s husband receives his citizenship, he plans to file a petition for his parents to
come.  
Applicant’s husband’s family members are residents and citizens of India.  They
too would like to come to the United States.  They include, Applicant’s father-in-law,
mother-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law.  Her father-in-law is now retired.  At one
time he was employed with the government of the state where he lives as an executive
engineer for the irrigation department.  (Tr. p. 51.)  She believes he receives a state
pension.  Applicant used to speak with her in-laws a couple of times a month, but since
her husband now lives in the United States, she only speaks to them once a month or so
on holidays.   (Tr. p. 52.)  Applicant’s mother-in-law is a housewife, who was never
employed outside of the home.  She has no affiliation with the Indian Government.
Applicant speaks to her about every three weeks or so and only about her health and
casual matters.  Applicant has contact with her sister-in-law and brother-in-law about
once every six weeks or so.  (Tr. p. 80.)  Her sister-in-law is a housewife with one son.
Her brother-in-law is a stockbroker, and is in no way affiliated with the Indian
4
Government.  None of her in-laws  have any knowledge of the details of her job or that
she is applying for a security clearance or even what a security clearance is.  (Tr. p. 53.) 
      
Applicant owns nothing in India.  All of her assets are in the United States, which
include several bank accounts, a retirement account, and two properties.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits I, J, K, L, M and N.)      
Applicant credibly testified that she would never do anything to jeopardize the
national security of the United States or the men and women who serve our country’s
military.  (Tr. p. 81.)  If she were ever confronted with a situation where she was
contacted or threatened by the government of India or any related official, she would
immediately report it to her security department, as she has been briefed to do so.  (Tr.
pp. 56-57.)  
Applicant’s performance evaluation indicate that she consistently exceeds
expectations, and she received a $5,000 pay increase effective May 31, 2014, for her
performance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits Q and R.)  
Letters of recommendation from professional associates and friends of the
Applicant from both the United States and India, and a letter from her brother, collectively
indicate that Applicant is a highly focused, intelligent, honest, hardworking, trustworthy
individual.  She is an upstanding citizen of the United States and a dedicated employee
of her company.  She has excellent communication skills and a strong moral compass.
She strictly follows all rules and regulations and takes the responsibilities of her job very
seriously.  They believe that she is capable of properly handling sensitive information
and is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z,
AA, BB and CC.)      
I have considered the information provided by the Government on India.  India is
among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  There
have been numerous, recent criminal cases concerning export enforcement, economic
espionage, theft of trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving
both the government of India and private companies and individuals in India.  In March
2008, a Minnesota based company pleaded guilty to submitting false export licenses to
the Commerce Department in connection with the shipment of nuclear testing equipment
to an entity in India.  That same year, the Department of Justice brought two cases
against defendants charged with illegally exporting controlled products to Indian
government entities involved in the development of ballistic missiles, as well as space
launch vehicles and combat fighter jets.  More recently, in January 2013, the former
export control manager of a Pennsylvania based company pleaded guilty to the illegal,
unlicensed export to India and China of over 57 microwave amplifiers, products that have
military applications.  There are other cases concerning illegal export, or attempted
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India that have included: (1)
military night vision components; (2) vibration amplifiers and cable assemblies, for use in
both military and civilian aircraft; (3) manufacturing equipment related to improving the
accuracy of strategic ballistic missiles, which the U.S. Government deeded to be an
5
unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass
destruction or related delivery systems.  There are a number of terrorist groups that
operate in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, particularly along the Line of Control
separating Indian and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir.  The State Department strongly
recommends avoiding travel to the states of Jammu and Kashmir.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive sets forth policy factors and
conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given binding
consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the conditions are
neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede
the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.  Because each security
clearance case presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed
that these factors exhaust the realm of human experience, or apply equally in every
case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above, the factors most applicable to the
evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
7. (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion; and
7. (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information. 
6
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8. (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8. (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest; and
8. (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed
in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
7
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence) that
establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a
rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's situation and her
ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof
of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the Applicant
presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who has foreign connections may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  Foreign influence
can raise questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must
be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by
all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Conditions 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 7.(b)
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
8
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 8.(a) the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; 8.(b)
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest; and 8.(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation also apply.
Applicant has lived the American dream.  She immigrated to the United States
and obtained her education, a good job, properties, family and friends.  Most of  her
family are now United States citizens who reside here.  Those family members that are
residents and citizens of India are few in number.  Her older sister is currently trying to
immigrant to the United States.  Her father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law and
sister-in-law who are residents and citizens of India in no way pose a security risk to the
Applicant.  Applicant has limited contact with them, and they do not have any knowledge
of what she does, where she works, or that she is applying for a security clearance or its
ramifications.  (Tr. pp. 45-46.)  They have no affiliation with the Indian government that
could create any risk.  Her limited conversations with them are about their well being.  In
fact, they all hope to immigrate to the United States sometime in the near future.        
It is noted that the current political situation in India elevates the cause for concern
in this case.  In this case, the Applicant has everything to lose and nothing to gain by
engaging in any improper foreign contact with India.  Everything that he has worked for
and everything that she stands for will be destroyed.  Although the Applicant has only
resided in the United States a little over eight years, most of her immediate and extended
family members reside in and are citizens of the United States.  She has worked hard to
achieve her education, her work, her properties, her social life and friends here.  Her
long-standing ties and deep relationships are here.  All of her financial assets are here.
Her husband is here and they are planning on establishing their family in the United
States.  Applicant has adopted the American culture and its values.  Under the particular
facts of this case, the possibility of foreign influence does not exist, nor could it create the
potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I find that the
Applicant is not vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
9
the person may properly safeguard classified information.  The Applicant is an intelligent,
test engineer with an excellent work record for the Defense Department.  Her favorable
evidence, including her performance evaluation and letters of recommendation from
those that know her well, in addition to his overall intelligence and integrity gleaned from
her own testimony, all demonstrate her trustworthiness.  She has presented sufficient
evidence in mitigation to demonstrate that she is not a  security risk.
     
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, she has met her ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.e.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.f.: For the Applicant 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
10
