 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02166 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on November 20, 2013, seeking a security clearance. On July 24, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant a security clearance. On August 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and 
 
2 
 
 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 
6, 2014, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that 
contained documents marked as Items 1 through 7. On October 8, 2014, a copy of the 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, giving him 30 days from its receipt to submit objections 
or supply additional information. He did not submit a response to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on January 30, 2015.  
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Items 6 and 7 are reports of investigation (ROI) from Applicant’s background 
investigation. Specifically, they are summaries of Applicant’s interviews conducted by 
Office of Personnel Management investigators on January 28, 2014, and April 9, 2014. 
The Directive provides that “[a]n ROI may be received with an authenticating witness 
provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.”1 Although 
Applicant has not objected to Items 6 and 7, his failure to object does not amount to 
authentication of the documents or a waiver of the rule.2 Accordingly, Items 6 and 7 will 
not be received and considered in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had five delinquent debts 
totaling about $17,315 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
each allegation with comments. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for that contractor since March 2008. He is married and has three children, 
ages 25, 27, 30. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time.4 
 
Applicant’s e-QIP reflected that he has been employed since October 1993. He 
was first employed as a corrections officer before obtaining his current job. In the e-QIP, 
he disclosed that he had a truck for 19 months, was informed that the first payment on 
                                                          
1 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the 
Appeal Board restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is 
admissible). 
 
2 Under Federal Rule of Evidence 901, “[t]he requirement of authentication or identification as a 
condition precedent to admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the matter 
in question is what its proponent claims.” Waiver means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – 
express or implied – of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had 
both knowledge of the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan 
A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4, 5. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
the truck was never received, decided not to make any additional payments, and 
returned the truck to the dealer. He disclosed no other delinquent debts in the e-QIP.5  
 
A credit report dated January 16, 2014, reflected that Applicant had a judgment 
entered against him for $7,050 in November 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and had medical 
accounts placed for collection in the amounts of $243, $53, and $50 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e). 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was not listed in the credit report.6  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
incurred because he was out of work (no other information provided), and this debt 
pertained to a truck he returned. He also stated that he had a repayment agreement for 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, was attempting to identify the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
and would pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e. However, he provided no proof of 
repayment agreements or payments made toward the delinquent debts.7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred five delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. The evidence is sufficient to establish the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant indicated that he incurred the delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.a because 
he was out of work. He provided no other information about that period of 
unemployment. No period of unemployment was listed in his e-QIP. Consequently, it is 
unknown why that period of unemployment occurred, how long it lasted, and what 
impact it had on his financial situation. Furthermore, he presented no proof that he 
entered into repayment agreements, made payments, or took other actions to resolve 
his delinquent debts. He had an opportunity to present such evidence when he received 
the FORM, but did not avail himself of that opportunity. Based on the record evidence, I 
am unable to find that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved, are unlikely to 
recur, and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I am also unable to find that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. His handling of his financial problems leaves me with doubts as 
to his current eligibility for access to classified information. Following the Egan decision 
and the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national 
security. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The administrative judge should consider the adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
