 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02306 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on August 7, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
17, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on September 28, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
December 3, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was 
marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered three exhibits (AE), 
which were marked as AE A through C. All were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information, she 
submitted AE D through Q which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation, with explanations. 
The admission is incorporated as a finding of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as a 
computer operator and has held that position since April 2013. She has a high school 
diploma, received a diploma from a trade/technical/vocational school in 2007, and has 
taken some college courses. She is divorced and has a 20-year old daughter who has 
some mental-health issues. She has no military background, but previously held a 
security clearance in 1990.1  
 
 The SOR alleges one charged-off student loan in the amount of $17,754. This 
debt was listed in credit reports from July 2013, March 2014, and September 2015. She 
also listed the delinquent debt in her trustworthiness determination application in June 
2013.2  
 
 Applicant acknowledges that she incurred the student loan debt in 2006 when 
she attended a jewelry school. She attended for a year and received a certificate of 
diploma for completing the course. Thereafter, she worked in the industry from 
September 2007 to December 2007 until she resigned. She believes she was 
defrauded by the jewelry school owner into applying for a federal student loan when she 
thought she was receiving state retraining benefits. She admitted signing the student 
loan paperwork, but claimed she was tired and wasn’t sure what she was signing. She 
also claims she contacted the student loan agency to cancel the loan, but was not 
permitted to do so. She made payments of approximately $154 per month until 2012 
when the payments became too burdensome. She contacted the student loan agency in 
an attempt to reduce her monthly payments to $25, but the agency refused to accept 
this lower payment amount. She has not had any further contact with her student loan 
creditor.3   
 
 Applicant has the ability to pay the full amount of the loan. She has an 
investment account that contains approximately $82,000. She testified that, “If I have to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 24, 32, 36, 43; GE 1.  
 
2 GE 1-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-28, 40-43, 47; AE B-D; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
pay it to keep my job, I will.” She presented no evidence of payment at the hearing or in 
her post-hearing document submission. She is current on her mortgage and all other 
debts. Her annual income is approximately $44,000 from her primary job. She also has 
a supplementary job as a seamstress where she makes a wage of $10 per hour. She 
has not received financial counseling.4  
 
 Applicant offered numerous character letters from friends and coworkers. They 
all reflect the writers’ opinions that Applicant is a person of high character with positive 
traits such as integrity, trustworthiness, professionalism, and job dedication.5 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 28, 30, 33, 39, 40, 48-49. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has a delinquent student loan that remains unpaid. Although she may 
have a dispute with the school that she obtained the student loan to attend, it is 
undisputed that she received the student loan money, attended and graduated from the 
school, obtained a job in the industry that the schooling was for, and made payments on 
the student loan for a number of years through 2012. The evidence also supported that 
she has the ability to pay the debt, but refuses to do so. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s nonpayment of her delinquent student loan when she has the ability 
to pay it casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
is not applicable.  
 
Although Applicant’s has had to deal with some of her daughter’s medical issues 
and her claim that she was defrauded by the school could be considered circumstances 
beyond her control, she has done little to resolve the debt besides seeking a reduction 
of her payment amount to total $25 monthly. However, she has the current resources to 
pay the entire debt outright. She has not put forth responsible efforts to resolve her 
student loan. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Additionally, Applicant has not paid 
or established a payment plan for the debt. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any documentation supporting a dispute of the validity 
of the student loan debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances 
remain a concern despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information by considering the 
totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by her daughter’s medical issues. However, I also considered that the debt 
remains unpaid, despite her present ability to pay it. Her unwillingness to address her 
student loan debt causes me to question her trustworthiness, reliability, and good 
judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph: 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
