 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03137 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 5, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 
2006, which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2014, and submitted an 
undated supplemental answer. He elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated October 17, 2014, was provided to him by letter dated 
September 10, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on October 29, 2014. He was 
given 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional information, and by separate 
memorandum dated December 1, 2014, Department Counsel did not object to the 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on December 5, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations under Guideline F, SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.h; and denied the sole allegation under Guideline E, SOR ¶ 2.a. 
After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old software engineer, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since February 2013. He seeks a security clearance in 
conjunction with his current employment. (Items 6 and 7.) 
 
Applicant was awarded an associate’s degree in December 2008 and a 
bachelor’s degree in December 2012. He married in July 2012. According to the 
FORM, he does not have any children. Applicant did not serve in the armed 
forces. (Items 6 and 7.) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
The SOR alleged eight allegations under this concern. The debts and 
status of those debts are:  
 
(1) August 2013 judgment in the amount $4,813 for a credit card debt. 
Applicant contacted the creditor, made payment arrangements, and has been 
making $200 monthly payments since September 2013. ACCOUNT BEING 
RESOLVED; (2) collection account for medical service in the amount of $1,209. 
Applicant contacted the creditor, made payment arrangements, and has been 
making $40 monthly payments since September 2014. ACCOUNT BEING 
RESOLVED; (3) charged-off student loan in the amount of $26,839. This is 
Applicant’s largest debt and one that he will begin paying off as soon as he has 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
honored his commitments to his other creditors and has available funds. As 
discussed, supra and infra, all of Applicant’s debts except for this one have been 
resolved or are being resolved; (4) collection account for a credit card in the 
amount of $4,294. This is the same account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that resulted in 
a judgment against Applicant and is discussed supra.  DUPLICATE DEBT – 
ACCOUNT BEING RESOLVED; (5) collection account for a cell phone in the 
amount of $752. ACCOUNT PAID IN FULL – RESOLVED; (6) collection account 
for a utility bill in the amount of $369. Applicant successfully disputed this bill and 
the creditor acknowledged the debt was listed in error. The debt was deleted from 
Applicant’s credit report. ACCOUNT RESOLVED; (7) collection account for 
medical service in the amount of $150. ACCOUNT PAID IN FULL – RESOLVED; 
and (8) collection account for medical service in the amount of $57. ACCOUNT 
PAID IN FULL – RESOLVED. Applicant provided documentation substantiating 
payments discussed supra. (Items 4 and 5.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties stem from being a full-time student and 
unemployed from February 2009 to February 2013. He lacked the necessary 
income to pay his debts. During Applicant’s March 2013, Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that he would 
satisfy his debts and avoid future delinquencies. He has followed through on that 
promise. As noted supra, Applicant has addressed all of his debts except for his 
student loan. His plan is to clear up all of his other debts and as funds become 
available, he will be able to pay off his student loan. (SOR answer; Items 6 and 7.) 
In her FORM, Department Counsel noted that Applicant “provided proof of 
payment or resolution for all but one of his debts.” There is no evidence of 
financial counseling.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
One allegation is alleged under this concern, that Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose his delinquent debts that are alleged under financial 
considerations when completing his February 2013 e-QIP. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) 
 
Applicant explained that when he completed his e-QIP he was in the 
process of moving and did not have his financial files with him. Accordingly, he 
estimated when his debts arose and incorrectly concluded that they were outside 
the seven-year timeframe posed. He stated that he was not attempting to deceive 
or hide anything and if he were to answer the financial questions again, he would 
answer them differently. (SOR answer.) 
 
In reviewing Applicant’s February 2013 e-QIP and March 2013 OPM PSI, I 
note that he failed to list a previous employer, his older brother, and that he was 
awarded a GED. Also, he listed other items incorrectly such as his unemployment, 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and several dates of previous employment. These additional shortcomings add 
credence to Applicant’s explanation that he was careless. It is clear that Applicant 
did not exercise due diligence when he completed his February 2013 e-QIP. He 
readily provided the correct information during his March 2013 OPM PSI. Taking 
into consideration the facts as a whole, I accept Applicant’s explanation that his 
failure to list adverse financial information was due to oversight and carelessness, 
and was not deliberate. (Items 6 and 7.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
In his Response to FORM, Applicant submitted a personal reference letter 
(PR). PR is a retired Air Force veteran and currently employed as a police officer. 
PR is familiar with Applicant and his financial difficulties and how he is overcoming 
those challenges. In sum, PR provided a very favorable assessment of Applicant’s 
character and suitability for a security clearance. (Response to FORM.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence 
presented. The Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
His debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives 
partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that are unlikely to recur and his behavior does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant experienced a 
lengthy period of unemployment. Once he began earning income and had the 
means to pay his debts, he systematically paid or is in the process of paying his 
creditors. As noted supra, Applicant’s debts are resolved or are being resolved 
and he has made substantial progress in regaining financial responsibility.1 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) are fully applicable. 
Applicant made a good-faith effort to address financial concerns alleged. He 
successfully resolved all of his debts except for his student loan and successfully 
disputed his $369 utility bill. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.  
 
The Government’s evidence does not establish that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his February 2013 e-QIP. As noted, Applicant was forthcoming during his 
OPM PSI one month after he completed his e-QIP. It is clear from the record that 
he was less than attentive in completing his e-QIP. While he should have shown 
greater diligence in accurately completing a document as important as an e-QIP, 
his negligence does not establish that he was attempting to conceal his financial 
situation from the Government. Based on Applicant’s denial and explanation, I find 
that Applicant did not deliberately attempt to deceive the Government or security 
officials on his security clearance application. 
 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has 
since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 
05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 
2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the 
Analysis section under Guidelines F and E is incorporated in this whole-person 
section. However, further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor weighs heavily in his 
favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is 
current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts 
have been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has 
paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is 
that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction 
of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered 
in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide 
for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been paid or are being resolved except for his 
student loan. He has a systematic plan in place. Due to circumstances beyond his 
control, his debts became delinquent. Despite his financial setback as a result of 
being unemployed, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a 
full financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E and the whole-
person analysis support a favorable decision. I specifically considered the 
circumstances that led to his financial difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps 
he has taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential for future service as a 
defense contractor, the mature and responsible manner in which he dealt with his 
situation, and his reference letter. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-
person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
