 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01974 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on July 25, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
17, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on October 17, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
December 4, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit list was marked 
as HE I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A-1 through A-12, which were 
admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit additional information, and he submitted AE B through H, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 17, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He is married for the second time and has five adult 
children (including two step-children). He has worked for his current employer, a 
defense contractor, for twelve years. He is a high school graduate who has taken some 
technical courses. He has not served in the military, but has previously held a security 
clearance.1  
  
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to pay his federal income taxes for the 
period 2009 through 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he owed approximately $937 (2009), 
$3,823 (2010), $2,611 (2011), and $950 (2012) for those years (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e). It 
further alleged he owed on two collection accounts in the amounts of $1,934 and $185. 
These allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions in his security clearance 
application, his Answer, and by a credit report from November 2013. The allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.a is inherent to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e and is duplicative. As such, 
I find in favor of Applicant on that allegation.2  
 
 Applicant has had financial problems dating back to 2003. Those past issues 
included filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1994, having his wages garnished for child 
support arrearages in the amount of $23,628, and having a lien filed against him in 1995 
for unpaid federal taxes in the amount of $18,412.3  
 
 Applicant admitted that has owed federal tax debt for several years (2004 – 
2013). He attributed the debt to the high amount of rent he was paying and not having 
any deductions, which could offset his income. He recently purchased a home that will 
have a monthly mortgage payment of approximately $2,880, which is less than his 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5, 19-20; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1, 3; Answer. 
 
3 Since these actions were not specifically alleged in the SOR, I will not consider this evidence as 
disqualifying conduct. I will consider the evidence for determining the applicability of any mitigating 
circumstances and when I weigh the whole-person factors. 
 
 
3 
 
 
monthly rent of approximately $3,005. Additionally, when he married his second wife in 
2007, his federal taxes increased. More recently, his wife’s income decreased from 
$80,000 per year to approximately $50,000 per year. His income is approximately 
$80,000 annually. He did not pay the federal taxes at the time they were due because 
he did not have the money to do so.4 
 
 Applicant presented documentary evidence showing that he set up a payment 
plan with the IRS and has been making consistent payments since 2007. He began by 
making monthly payments of $400 (Aug 2009 to May 2010, July 2011 to November 
2011, Feb 2012 to May 2012, Aug 2012 to May 2013), but he reduced the monthly 
payments to $200 in December 2013 and is currently paying that amount. He testified 
that he was unsure of the total amount he owed the IRS. His post-hearing documents 
from the IRS indicated that he owed $1,585 for tax year (TY) 2008 (not alleged); zero 
for TY 2009; $4,037 for TY 2010; $2,669 for TY 2011; $2,777 for TY 2012; and $4,299 
for TY 2013 (not alleged). Additionally, Applicant knows that he and his wife owe at 
least $12,000 on his 2014 federal tax return due to his wife taking funds out early from 
her 401k retirement account. Discarding the amounts owed for 2008, 2013, and 2014 
(not alleged and not considered as disqualifying conduct), the total Applicant owed the 
IRS for the SOR-related debts as of December 2014 was $9,483, which is more than  
the aggregate of the taxes owed as stated in the SOR.5 
 
 The collection account for $1,934 (SOR ¶ 1.f) resulted from Applicant’s use of a 
company credit card from 2002. He acknowledged that he failed to pay the debt at the 
time it was owed and he does not have the funds to pay it now. He stated there was 
some confusion about the responsibility for the debt because it was issued by one 
contractor-company, but when a follow-on contractor-company took over the business, 
it refused to reimburse him for the costs of his business-related expenses. He did not 
provide supporting documentation. This debt is unresolved.6 
 The collection debt for $185 (SOR ¶ 1.f) is a consumer debt. Applicant provided 
documentation showing that he attempted to resolve this debt with the creditor, but his 
written inquires went unanswered. He also provided evidence that the company is out of 
business. This debt is resolved.7 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified that he has supervised Applicant since 2008. He 
interacts with him on a daily basis. He believes Applicant is trustworthy, honest, has 
integrity, and he recommends him for a security clearance.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 21-22, 26, 29-30, 35, 40-41, 56; AE A-2 to A-4, A-12. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-40, 42, 52, 56; AE B-G; Answer. 
 
6 Tr. at 45, 48; GE 3; Answer. 
 
7 Tr. at 43-44; GE 3; Answer. 
 
8 Tr. at 61, 63. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent federal tax debts and a collection account that remain 
unpaid or unresolved. I find both the disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s tax debts are recent and remain unresolved. He has made some 
strides to address his tax obligations by making regular monthly payments to the IRS. 
However, he has not made any progress on resolving the overall debt. He still owes the 
IRS more now than he did when the SOR was written and that amount is exclusive of 
the amount he owes for 2008, 2013, and 2014. His past financial history casts doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find mitigating condition AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant blames his inability to pay his taxes on getting married, having to pay 
rent, and because his wife’s income decreased. Only the last of those reasons is a 
condition beyond his control. Applicant must also act responsibly. Here, although he set 
up a payment plan with the IRS to pay his past taxes, he is not making progress 
towards resolving his overall tax debt and he is incurring new tax debt (2013 and 2014) 
that he cannot pay. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling, and while there is some 
evidence that Applicant has begun to address his federal tax issues, he has incurred 
new tax debt for the last two years. He has made minimal progress in resolving his 
federal tax issues. Evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to address his tax 
issues is lacking. He also failed to resolve a collection credit card account from 2002. I 
find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s supervisor’s 
testimony about his positive character traits. On the other hand, I also considered that 
he failed to honor his obligation to pay his federal taxes and other debts for an extended 
 
7 
 
 
period of time. He is paying monthly payments to the IRS, but a significant balance 
remains and for the last two years he has incurred new tax debt. His inability to make 
any progress toward paying his federal taxes shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.g:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
