                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------- )       ADP Case No. 14-03236
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, Applicant mitigated
financial concerns. Eligibility for holding a public trust position is granted.
Statement of Case
On September 24, 2014,  the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the DoD could not make the affirmative
determination of eligibility for holding a public trust position and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); DoD regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as
amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on December 12, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on January
2
8, 2015. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government’s case
consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and eight
exhibits (A-H).  The transcript (Tr.) was received on January 21, 2015.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant asked for leave to keep the record
open to supplement the record with an historical accounting of payments to her debt
consolidation firm, 1099C forms for all of her settled debts, and the correct account
numbers on the debt covered by subparagraph 1.c. For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted seven days to supplement the record. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant documented the following: an email to
Department Counsel, tax form 1099Cs covering creditor 1.a and 1.c settlements,
documented records covering the 1.a judgment debt and 1.c account statement and
settlement payment,  creditor 1.b court records and payment documentation, account
statement covering Applicant’s 401(k) loan, mortgage accounting history, an historical
accounting of Applicant’s payments to her debt consolidation firm. Applicant’s post-
hearing submissions were admitted as AEs I-Q.   
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated one judgment for $13,757
and two consumer debts. The consumer debts exceeded $28,000. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations covered in
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, and admitted the allegation covered by subparagraph 1.c.
She claimed the debts were business-related and prompted by the loss of a supplier.
She claimed she enrolled in a debt-consolidation program administered by a law firm in
February 2009 and has been making monthly deposits on time. She claimed, too, that
she has only one claim left (i.e., the one covered by subparagraph 1.c) to be paid. And
she claimed that she is a dedicated and responsible employee of a dental insurance
company.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior reporting analyst for a dental insurance
company who seeks a determination of eligibility to hold a public trust position with a
dental care insurance firm with whom she has been employed since February 1989.
(GE 1; Tr. 40, 72-73) The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in June 1981 and divorced her husband in February 1988.
(GE 1) She has one adult child from this marriage, age 32. (GE 1; Tr. 40-41) She
remarried in January 1991 and has one adult child from this marriage (age 21) who
currently resides with her. (GE 1; Tr. 40-41) Applicant earned an associate of arts
3
degree from a local community college in May 1977. (GE 1)  She has no military
service. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2003 and 2008, Applicant owned a retail supply business that she
operated in sole-proprietorship form. (Tr. 41, 77) After the recession gained
momentum in 2008, Applicant experienced business-related losses with her business.
(Tr. 42, 73) When she closed her business in 2008, she still had three business debts
(i.e., creditors 1.a-1.c) on her company books that she could not address with her
limited resources.  She attributed all of her credit card debts to the business downturn
that impacted her business in the 2008 time frame. (Tr.  42-43) 
Before her three credit card debts (i.e., creditors 1.a-1.c) became delinquent,
Applicant contacted a debt consolidation law firm to explore repayment options. (Tr.
73)  In February 2009, Applicant enrolled in a debt consolidation program with the
same law firm. (AE H; Tr. 43-46) Her initial payment schedule called for payments of
$600 a month. (Tr. 44) She consistently made her agreed $600 monthly payments
over a four-year period (i.e., February 2009 through September 2012). (AE Q) 
Due to the increased expenses allocated to caring for her mother, Applicant
asked her debt consolidation firm in late 2012 to lower her monthly payments to $300
a month. (Tr. 44-46, 65-66) Her payment reduction was approved, and Applicant
maintained this reduced payment schedule for all of 2013 and 2014. (AE Q; Tr. 45-49).
Applicant has since settled and paid all of the listed debts in the SOR (i.e.,
creditors 1.a-1..c). (AEs A-C, E, and H-Q; Tr. 51-58) The historical accounting
furnished by her debt consolidation firm documented her $600 monthly payments to
the law firm between February 2009 and September 2012 and her $300 monthly
payments since January 2013. (AEs H and Q) Two of the three listed creditors (i.e.,
creditors 1.a and creditor 1.c), who settled with Applicant for less than the face
amounts of the debts, have furnished 1099C forms to Applicant for inclusion with her
federal tax returns. (AEs J-K; Tr. 48-52, 55-56-57) 
To settle her creditor 1.b debt, Applicant obtained a loan from her 401(k)
retirement account in December 2014 for $20,000 and issued a check of $12,261 to
the creditor to cover the agreed settlement amount  of the debt. (AEs E and O; Tr.  53-
54, 60).  Repayments on her 401(k) loan are $350 a month. (Tr. 60-61)
Applicant is current with her federal and state taxes. (Tr. 58-59) She grosses
$77,000 annually from her employment and nets $48,000 a year. (Tr. 76, 81) She is
responsible for monthly expenses for home utilities ($425), her cable service ($260),
her cell phone ($350), and her trash collection ($50), (Tr. 61-63) She has two credit
cards, but no automobile to service or travel expenses. (Tr. 70) Applicant has
$120,000 in her 401(k) retirement account net of the $20,000 loan she obtained to
settle her creditor 1.b debt. (Tr. 67-68) She covers her daughter’s health expenses and
pays $500 a month towards her mortgage, which runs $2,200 a month and is in current
4
payment status. (AE P; Tr.  61-64) She estimates to have about $100,000 of equity in
her home and estimates a net monthly remainder of about $200. (Tr. 63-67) 
 Endorsements
                        
Applicant provided character references from her managers and colleagues (AE
G) Her references characterize her as reliable and trustworthy and cite her selection
as her firm’s employee of the month in December 2012 as indicative of her
commitment, dedication, and trustworthiness. (AE G) Applicant has received an
employee of the month award in 2012 and earned exceptional performance
evaluations for the years 2009 through 2013. (AE F)  
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as” sensitive positions.”
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3) “The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . .  assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation
¶ C6.1.1.1)  DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures
contained in the directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be
made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1)
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering public trust eligibility cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual
applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to hold a public trust position. These guidelines include
"[c]onditions that could raise a security concern [trustworthiness concerns] and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), as well as any of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate trustworthiness concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each
of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance
with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to
examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable trust risk. 
5
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified [sensitive] information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income
is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”  AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S.
759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only
those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to hold or
maintain a public trust position. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused a position requiring trust and reliability before it can deny or
revoke eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and
weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
demonstrate good judgment and trustworthiness. 
6
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her eligibility to hold a public trust position through evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Based on the requirement of the Directive and
the Regulation that all public trust positions be clearly consistent with the national
interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her position of
trust eligibility. Like security clearance determinations, public trust decisions, or
decisions involving trustworthiness, “ should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a senior reporting analyst who accumulated delinquent debts
during a business downturn in the 2008 time period that adversely affected her retail
supply business. During this period, she accumulated three business-related debts
(inclusive of a judgment obtained by creditor 1.a) that exceeded $31,000. Her debt
accruals warrant the application of two disqualifying conditions (DC): ¶ 19(a), “inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a public trust position involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the public trust position holder. Quite apart from any agreement the
trust holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the public trust
position holder’s duties necessarily imposes important duties of trust and candor on
the holder that are considerably higher than those typically imposed on Government
employees and contractors involved in other lines of Government business. See
Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). Failure of the applicant to
make concerted efforts to pay or resolve her debts when able to do so raises
concerns about whether the applicant has demonstrated the trust and judgment
necessary to safeguard sensitive information.
Since February 2009, Applicant has been enrolled in a debt consolidation
program and has settled and paid each of the three listed delinquent debts in the SOR.
She is current with her mortgage, debt-free, and is able to maintain her finances in
stable condition. She has ample reserves in her 401(k) retirement account,
considerable equity in her home, and a net monthly remainder to draw upon in
emergencies. 
While the Appeal Board has never required an applicant to repay all of his or
her debts in demonstrating a return to financial stability, it does require some good-
faith payment initiatives. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21,
2008). Applicant’s documented payment efforts fully meet all of the minimal criteria
established by the Board.
Based on Applicant’s demonstrated business losses during a severe downturn
in 2008, considerable extenuating circumstances are associated with her inability to
pay off or otherwise resolve her outstanding business debts earlier in time. Available to
Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
7
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Extenuating circumstances alone are not enough to enable Applicant to mitigate
trust concerns over her past failures to address her debts. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11366, at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing other ISCR case authorities)). In
Applicant’s case, she engaged a debt consolidation firm as soon as she recognized
she would not be able to pay off her debts individually with her limited resources and
has since settled each of the listed debts in the SOR. Her good-faith efforts meet both
the good-faith and promptness prongs of MC ¶ 20(b).
Applicant’s earnest repayment initiatives merit application of two of the
mitigating conditions for financial considerations.  MC ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment,” and MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply to Applicant’s situation
A whole-person assessment enables Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to take earlier
steps to address them. The three delinquent debts she accrued were all business-
related and were attributable to the economic downturn that severely affected her retail
sales business. Through her earnest repayment efforts, she has settled each of the
listed debts and is currently debt-free with ample home equity available to her should
an emergency arise.   
Important to a whole-person assessment is the trust and confidence that
Applicant has earned from her manager and colleagues who have worked with her and
know her personally. She has received an employee of the month award in 2012 and
earned exceptional performance evaluations. Worthy of additional credit are her
working consultations to date with her debt consolidation firm who has been active in
settling her debts and restoring her finances to respectable levels of stability,
consistent with minimum eligibility criteria for holding a public trust position.  
Considered together, Applicant has made major progress with her finances
since she engaged her debt consolidation firm in 2009. Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.c. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                            For Applicant
8
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
public trust position.  Eligibility is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
