KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings are supported by substantial evidence.  Applicant’s
additional debt and the passage of time without meaningful debt resolution constitute significant
derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated.  Therefore, the Judge did not err in
concluding that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns despite a prior favorable
adjudication.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-00398.a1
DATE: 02/10/2015
DATE: February 10, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00398
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 26, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 26, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a).
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c).
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns; and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm the decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since June 2013.  He was unemployed
from January to April of that year.  Applicant’s SOR lists four delinquent debts, totaling over
$18,000.  Applicant admitted these debts in his response to the SOR.  The first debt is over $15,000
owed on a medical credit card.  This debt, owed since October 2010, was for a surgical procedure
for Applicant’s wife.  He states that he tried to negotiate an installment agreement but that the
creditor did not propose terms that he could accept.  He sought credit counseling in July 2013, but
he did not disclose the results of this undertaking.  Applicant has made no payment on this debt, and
it is unresolved.
The second is $601 owed for a medical debt that originated in 2008.  Applicant has made no
payments on this debt.  He claims to have disputed it but provided no corroboration.  He contends
that his insurance should have paid it.  He also contends that he has tried to resolve this debt several
times, but no putative creditor will claim ownership.  The debt is unresolved.
The third is a medical account for $189 that has been owed since 2012.  Although Applicant
claims that he has tried to settle this account, no organization has responded to his inquiries.  The
debt is unresolved.
The fourth is a judgment for $2,547.  This debt originated in 2006.  Applicant purchased a
computer while living overseas.  He claims that he sought information from a collection agency but
has not been successful.  He states that this debt has disappeared from his credit reports.  It is
unresolved.
Applicant states that he is not overextended and is capable of budgeting his money.  He
provided no evidence of good character or evidence relating to his judgment, trustworthiness, or
reliability.  The Judge noted that he was not able to evaluate Applicant’s demeanor insofar as the
case was decided without a hearing.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised two concerns: “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts”1 and “a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”2 In further
concluding that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his delinquent debts, the
3
Judge noted the lack of evidence that they had been resolved.  He stated that these debts were not
due to circumstances beyond Applicant’s control, insofar as they became delinquent well before his
2013 unemployment.  The Judge noted that Applicant had received financial counseling but stated
that there is no evidence that his delinquent debts are under control.  He also noted that Applicant
did not corroborate his claim to have disputed two of the debts.  In the whole-person analysis, the
Judge reiterated that Applicant had done nothing to resolve his debts.  He stated that Applicant’s
lack of action is voluntary and reflects a lack of judgment.  He stated that Applicant had made
assertions about his finances “without any credible evidence.”  Decision at 6.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge findings of fact.  He asserts that he has paid some of his debts
and that he has disputed others.  He states that his response to the SOR admitted the existence of
these debts in his name but not their legitimacy.  In presenting this assignment of error, Applicant
cites to evidence from outside the record, some of which post-dates the Judge’s decision.  We cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  We have examined the Judge’s findings in
light of the record that was before him.  We conclude, among other things, that the record does not
support Applicant’s argument that his response to the SOR admitted merely to the existence of the
debts in question.  See, for example, the following from the first paragraph of his response: “I will
state that I admit that all of the items on the Statement of Reasons are financial obligations that
belong to me.”  Throughout the response Applicant states or implies a belief that he himself incurred
these debts.  The Judge’s findings are based upon substantial record evidence or constitute
reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant argues that his circumstances do not raise security concerns.  He believes that the
evidence viewed as a whole does not suggest unwillingness to pay debts or a history of not meeting
his financial obligations.  We note that the Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven
conduct under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s clearance eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No.11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  In the case before us, Applicant’s SOR admissions,
along with the evidence contained in the File of Relevant Material, support the Judge’s conclusions
that Applicant’s debt problems go back many years, that Applicant has not resolved the SOR debts,
and that Applicant has not shown a connection between his unemployment and his financial
difficulties.    
In making this argument, Applicant cites to evidence that he was granted a clearance in 2011
by another Government agency.  He states that three of the SOR debts were present at that time and
that they did not pose a barrier to a favorable decision.  He argues that the additional debt that he
acquired since then should not be a reason to conclude that he is a security risk.  However, the
additional delinquent debt and the passage of time without demonstrable efforts at debt resolution,
taken as a whole, constitute significant derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated.
Accordingly, the Department of Defense is free to evaluate Applicant’s current circumstances and
his pertinent history.  See ISCR Case No. 11-09245 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2014) for a discussion
4
of reciprocity between DoD and other agencies in adjudicating clearance applications.  The Judge’s
conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems raised concerns under Guideline F is sustainable.
Applicant cites to evidence that he believes supports his case for mitigation.  Among other
things, he notes that his clearance interview contains a statement to the effect that there is nothing
in his background that could be used for purposes of blackmail.  However, this statement merely
summarizes Applicant’s replies to the interviewer’s questions.  It does not represent the
interviewer’s opinion of Applicant’s trustworthiness or judgment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
08118 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2013).  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.11-
10255, supra.  Neither are they sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner
that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd.
Aug. 8, 2014).
 The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
