 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03223 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct concerns. 
He used cocaine from 2005 to 2012. His last use occurred after he accepted a position 
with a defense contractor and was aware of his employer’s drug-free workplace policy. 
Under the circumstances, Applicant’s conduct raises unresolved questions about his 
judgment and his conduct is too recent to mitigate concerns that he would engage in 
similar conduct in the future. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct raised security concerns under the 
drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines (Guidelines H and E). On August 15, 
2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued 
eligibility for access to classified information.1 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 12, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a 
notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for January 9, 2015. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 3, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant appeared and testified in support of 
his case. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on January 9, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:2 
 
 Applicant, 27, is single with no children. He used cocaine while in college from 
2005 to 2009. After graduating from college, Applicant submitted an application for 
appointment as a commissioned officer in the U.S. military. He submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA) in conjunction with his overall military application. On his 
initial SCA, Applicant disclosed a past conviction for driving while under the influence 
and that he used marijuana on one occasion while in college. He deliberately omitted 
his cocaine use on the advice of friends who told him that the disclosure of such 
derogatory information would likely result in the denial of his military application. His 
application for appointment as a commissioned officer was ultimately denied, but 
unbeknownst to Applicant his application for access to classified information was 
granted. (Tr. at 8, 21-23, 25-27, 34-35; Gx. 2 at 32-33) 
 
 In 2012, Applicant accepted a position as an information technology project 
manager for a cyber-intelligence unit with his current employer, a defense contractor. 
Shortly before starting his new job, Applicant went on vacation with friends. He was 
offered cocaine and decided to use it. He immediately regretted the decision. (Tr. at 23-
24, 27-29) Applicant explained that he used the cocaine because he understood he 
would never be able to use illegal drugs again after he started his new job, as his 
employer has a drug-free workplace policy. He was also aware that he would have to 
take a pre-employment drug screen before starting his new job. (Tr. at 36) 
 
 In 2013, Applicant submitted a SCA in connection with his current employment. 
Applicant disclosed his past drug use, to include his use of cocaine in college and while 
on vacation. He has not used any illegal drugs since 2012. (Tr. at 36-37; Gx. 1 at 36-37) 
At hearing, Applicant expressed his intent to remain drug free. He also stated that his 
decision to seek and accept a position with his current employer was his way (after his 
application to serve in the military was rejected) to support the defense of the nation. 
(Tr. at 40-41) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
                                                          
2 In reaching my findings of fact, I have made only those inferences reasonably supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence.  
 
3 
 
 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative 
judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3 However, a judge must decide each case based on its 
own merits because there is no per se rule requiring disqualification.4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.5 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
3 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
5 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal. Rather, such a decision signifies that the 
applicant has engaged in conduct or has otherwise experienced circumstances that raise questions about 
his or her judgment and reliability.”). 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s cocaine use from 2005 to 2012 raises the drug involvement concern 
and the applicability of the following disqualifying conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse; and  
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s cocaine use meets the definition of “drug abuse” set forth in the 
Directive.6 AG ¶ 25(a) applies. His use of cocaine after being granted a security 
clearance triggers application of AG ¶ 25(g), because the disqualifying condition does 
not require that the individual have actual knowledge hey were granted a clearance at 
the time of the drug use. However, I have given this disqualifying condition less weight 
in my overall analysis because Applicant was not aware at the time he last used 
cocaine that his initial clearance application had been granted.7  
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the drug 
involvement concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and only the 
following were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
                                                          
6 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
7 I recognize that but for Applicant’s intentional falsification of his initial SCA it is unlikely he would have 
been granted a security clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant last used cocaine almost three years ago, which would generally tend 
to support the proposition that it is unlikely the behavior will reoccur. However, the 
circumstances under which Applicant last used cocaine raise continuing doubts about 
his judgment and the likelihood of recurrence. Applicant, after having not used any 
illegal drugs since graduating from college in 2009, decided to use cocaine while on 
vacation in 2012. Only three years have again passed since Applicant last used cocaine 
and, in light of his history of illegal drug use, a lengthier period of abstinence is required 
before an affirmative favorable finding can be made that the security concerns raised by 
his conduct have been mitigated.  
 
 Additionally, although Applicant immediately regretted his latest decision to use 
cocaine, he had already accepted a position with a federal contractor and knew his 
employer had a drug-free workplace policy. He was thus on clear notice that the use of 
illegal drugs was inconsistent with his new position as a federal contractor. Under such 
circumstances, even after crediting Applicant’s testimony, it is too soon to conclude that 
he will not engage in similar security significant conduct in the future.8 AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 
26(b) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s cocaine use, and in particular his latest use after accepting his 
current position with a federal contractor, raise the personal conduct security concern. 
Applicant’s poor judgment in using cocaine establishes the disqualifying condition listed 
at AG ¶ 16(c).9 The personal conduct guideline also sets forth several factors that may 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 14-01669 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2015) (favorable credibility determination does not 
preclude a judge from finding that an individual failed to meet their burden of persuasion); ISCR Case No. 
11-09172 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2013) (reaffirming precedent that no bright-line rule exists for 
determining recency of illegal drug use and such determination will depend on the circumstances of each 
case); ISCR Case No. 10-07312 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011) (notwithstanding four year abstinence of illegal 
drug use before SOR was issued, unfavorable decision sustained due to applicant’s history of illegal drug 
use); ISCR Case No. 10-06480 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2011) (four year abstinence of illegal drug use 
insufficient to overcome evidence raising questions about applicant’s judgment). 
 
9 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not safeguard protected information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
mitigate the security concern raised by Applicant’s conduct. The relevant personal 
conduct mitigating condition is similar to that found under the drug involvement 
guideline,10 and for similar reasons it is not applicable. Applicant’s personal conduct 
remains a security concern.11  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).12 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s honesty in finally revealing the 
extent of his past drug use and testimony about his heartfelt desire to serve the nation. 
However, this favorable evidence, as well as the other mitigating record evidence, does 
not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Security clearance adjudications are by 
their very nature predictive judgments, where an applicant’s past history is the best 
indicator of future conduct. Applicant’s past conduct leaves me with doubts as to his 
current eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
10 Compare, AG ¶ 17(c) (“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”), with, AG ¶ 26(a) (similar 
language). 
 
11 I considered Applicant’s past dishonesty, but he corrected the misleading information about his past 
drug use during his current security clearance investigation. Although his action to correct the previous 
misleading information cannot be considered prompt, the evidence supports a finding that it was done in 
good-faith and not after being confronted with the adverse information. See AG ¶ 17(a).  
 
12 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
