 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03248 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley and Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges Applicant pleaded guilty to 
conspiracy to steal government property and structuring money transactions. He was 
sentenced to 21 months imprisonment and restitution of more than $140,000. He has 
been making payments to address the restitution. Applicant disclosed sufficient facts on 
his March 15, 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 
86) about his background for the Government to assess his worthiness to be entrusted 
with access to classified information. Financial considerations and personal conduct 
concerns are mitigated; however, criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2013, Applicant signed an SF 86. (GE 1) On October 10, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to him, alleging security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), F 
(financial considerations), and E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Based on information available to the Government, DOD adjudicators could not 
make the affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue Applicant’s security clearance, and they recommended that his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should 
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On October 24, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
(HE 3) On December 15, 2014, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On 
December 18, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the 
case to me. On January 7, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for 
January 15, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference. Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and 
place of the hearing. (Tr. 11-12) I received some documents concerning restitution. (pg. 
138-144) On January 19, 2014, I received three additional exhibits. (pg. 145-148) 
Applicant and four witnesses made statements during his hearing. I received the 
transcript of the hearing on January 26, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel proffered five exhibits, and four of the five exhibits were 
admitted without objection. (Tr. 24-25; GE 1-2, 4-5) Applicant objected to consideration 
of GE 3, a letter from Applicant’s former employer, asserting it was not properly 
authenticated. (Tr. 12-16) I sustained the objection to the letter. Id.    
 
Applicant offered 12 documents into evidence at his hearing (Tr. 25-30; AE A-L; 
pg. 1-144). Department Counsel objected to consideration of some of Applicant’s 
documents because they made statements about Applicant’s innocence or pertained to 
his criminal trial. (Tr. 16-17) Applicant countered that the exhibits show context and 
extenuation and mitigation of his conduct during the offense, trial, and post-trial. (Tr. 16-
17) I overruled Department Counsel’s objection. (Tr. 17)    
 
Applicant agreed that he would not be contesting his guilt of the criminal offenses 
to which he pleaded guilty; however, he would be presenting extenuating and mitigating 
evidence and evidence to show the context of the offenses. (Tr. 18-19; HE 4) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response denied the SOR allegations. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old, and he is seeking employment from a defense 
contractor to enable him to continue his work in aviation. (Tr. 122) In 1994, he was 
awarded a bachelor of science degree in aero technology. (Tr. 123-124) In 1995, he 
                                            
1To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
married, and he has two living children, who are 7 and 13 years old. (Tr. 39-41, 122-
123)    
 
Applicant joined the Marine Corps, was commissioned, and became a pilot. (Tr. 
32-33) He served on active duty from 1992 to 2004, and thereafter in the Navy Reserve. 
(Tr. 39, 83) He received several awards for his aviation and leadership skills; he 
graduated on the Commandant’s list from an important training course; and in 2003, he 
was designed instructor pilot of the year for his squadron. (Tr. 33-34; pg. 56) He was 
involved in numerous military exercises between 1997 and 2004. (Tr. 33) He received 
two Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medals and two National Defense Service 
Medals. (Tr. 34; pg. 55-56) He had access to classified information; he never violated 
security rules; and there were no allegations of security violations. (Tr. 35) He was 
involuntarily separated from the Marine Corps for failure to be promoted from the rank of 
captain. (Tr. 83; pg. 53) He received an honorable discharge in 2004, which indicates it 
is provided “as a testimonial of Honest and Faithful Service,” and he received more than 
$60,000 in separation pay. (Tr. 35, 83-84; pg. 53) 
 
Several months before leaving active duty, Applicant noted in a physical 
evaluation that he had no hearing loss; however, he did so to maintain his flight status 
and to avoid being grounded for medical reasons. (Tr. 84, 85-86) Applicant’s separation 
physical described medical issues involving injury or illness regarding his foot, back, 
arm, and hearing. (Tr. 36) His hearing loss was due to being around loud aircraft engine 
noises. (Tr. 36) The same day Applicant separated from active duty, he also applied for 
benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). (Tr. 37; pg. 64-67) The VA 
conducted a medical evaluation; however, the VA did not conduct a hearing 
examination. (Tr. 38, 85) In November 2004, the VA denied his claim for disability 
benefits. (Tr. 38, 85) Some delay in the processing of his claim was caused when the 
VA lost Applicant’s claim or medical records. (Tr. 52, 88) In early 2005, Applicant 
appealed his VA disability denial and started his employment as an airline commercial 
pilot. (Tr. 87) Applicant did not report any hearing loss to the airline that employed him 
or to the Department of Transportation. (Tr. 100) He passed several hearing tests from 
2006 to 2008. (Tr. 101) 
 
Applicant’s spouse had four miscarriages; one daughter died at birth in August 
2000; his youngest daughter was born prematurely; and his daughter spent seven 
weeks in the neonatal intensive care unit. (Tr. 41-43, 53-54; pg. 145-147) Applicant was 
under substantial stress due to his heavy airline flight schedule, his spouse’s medical 
history, time spent with his daughter in the hospital, and the welfare of his family. Id. In 
August 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast and New Orleans. (Tr. 87) 
Applicant worked diligently in the relief efforts after Hurricane Katrina. (Tr. 48-49) His 
residence was seriously damaged during Hurricane Katrina by a tornado. (Tr. 49-50) 
Applicant and his family moved to a different state to be closer to his spouse’s family. 
(Tr. 51, 53) These stressful circumstances may have affected Applicant’s judgment and 
ability to make appropriate choices. (Tr. 41-43, 51-54; pg. 145-147) 
 
In 2008, Applicant was arrested in connection with his role in a scheme involving 
fraudulent claims made to the VA for disability benefits. (Tr. 54) Applicant was adamant 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
during the process awaiting trial that he intended to plead not guilty and contest the 
charges. (Tr. 55) On the third day of trial, Applicant’s attorney convinced him that he 
should change his plea to guilty. (Tr. 56) He pleaded guilty because he wanted to be 
able to take care of his family. (Tr. 57) Applicant said pleading guilty “devastated” him. 
“It broke [his] heart because [he] believed in [his] innocence.” (Tr. 58) He provided 
numerous letters describing the impact on his mental state from the investigation, trial, 
and guilty plea. While he was in prison, Applicant worked as a GED instructor for the 
other prisoners. (Tr. 59) 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Two individuals with access to VA records (P and M) entered into a conspiracy 
with VA-eligible disability claimants (VA claimants) to alter VA records, improperly 
obtain benefits, and then receive kickbacks from the VA claimants and their 
dependents. (Tr. 90-92; HE 5 at 2) P and Applicant became acquainted; Applicant told 
P about his difficulties with his VA disability claim; and P told Applicant that he could 
obtain a disability rating for Applicant in return for a kickback to P, who would alter his 
records concerning his VA claim for hearing disability payments. (Tr. 93; HE 5 at 2) In 
August 2007, the VA tested Applicant’s hearing; however, P submitted a different report 
to the VA that showed Applicant had significant hearing loss. (Tr. 90-96; HE 5 at 2) P 
removed other documents from Applicant’s VA file. Id.  
 
Applicant emphasized that P altered, removed, and substituted Applicant’s VA 
records, and that Applicant did not personally take these actions. (Tr. 97) Nevertheless, 
Applicant and P were both beneficiaries of P’s conduct, as P’s conduct caused the VA 
to pay Applicant funds to which he was not entitled, and P received a kickback from 
Applicant. (Tr. 97) 
 
In October 2007, the VA approved Applicant’s disability claim and paid him over 
$90,000 in benefits, based on the date he filed his initial VA claim. Id. He also began 
receiving monthly payments of $2,500. Id. In November 2007, he withdrew funds in 
three increments of $10,000, and he paid P his kickback, using a check. Id. Applicant 
told the bank that P was repairing and upgrading his residence. (HE 5 at 2-3) Later, 
Applicant made additional payments to P until he had paid P a total of more than 
$60,000. (HE 5 at 3)2 Applicant told federal law enforcement officials that his payments 
to P were charitable contributions.3 Id. Applicant was charged with nine counts of 
                                            
2Applicant stated in his closing argument that he had “no malicious intent. Everything was 
internally handled by [P] and accomplished without my knowledge.” (Tr. 186) This statement is 
inconsistent with his guilty plea to conspiracy to steal VA funds, and a closing argument is not evidence.   
 
3Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he lied to federal law enforcement officials when 
confronted about the improper payments from the VA and that he is currently on supervised probation. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
various violations of Title 18. Id. Three days into trial, Applicant and the Government 
reached a plea agreement. Applicant pleaded guilty to conspiring to steal Government 
property and structuring multiple banking transactions to evade reporting requirements. 
Id. Applicant was under great pressure when he pleaded guilty because of concerns 
about his family and the increase in magnitude of the penalty if he was convicted of 
more than two counts. (Tr. 105-106) He said he was also concerned that the 
Government might prosecute his spouse as a co-conspirator. (Tr. 106) However, he did 
not explain what facts about his spouse’s conduct supported his belief that his spouse 
may have had co-conspirator liability.  
 
Applicant was sentenced to 21 months of imprisonment followed by two years of 
supervised release. (HE 5 at 3-4) He served one year in prison. (Tr. 169-170) Applicant 
will continue to be on federal probation until May 2015. (Tr. 65, 172) Applicant’s 
probation reports indicate he is compliant with all probation rules. (Tr. 65) Applicant is 
not required to report to his probation officer. (Tr. 65) After his trial, Applicant attempted 
to withdraw his guilty plea; however, the trial and appellate court declined to grant his 
request. (Tr. 104; HE 5) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
When Applicant learned he was under investigation, he attempted to stop the VA 
from sending him additional monthly VA disability checks. (Tr. 60-61) Applicant and his 
attorney placed VA payment totaling $31,000 into an escrow account. (Tr. 61) Applicant 
signed the funds over to his attorney to use for Applicant’s legal defense. (Tr. 62) 
Applicant complained to the state bar association because he believed his attorney 
wrongfully appropriate the VA funds.  
 
Applicant’s 2010 restitution agreement stipulated that he would make regular 
payments until he repaid more than $140,000 that he wrongfully received from the VA. 
(Tr. 63; SOR ¶ 2.a) There was no time limit or term for the repayment, and the interest 
rate is zero percent. (Tr. 63-64) Applicant initially paid $10 monthly when he was 
unemployed, and now he pays $50 a month. (Tr. 63) The court’s restitution order also 
requires one of his convicted co-conspirators to pay restitution towards the $140,000 
debt. (Tr. 63-64) Applicant has paid $3,500 to $4,000 in restitution, and he still owes 
over $140,000. (Tr. 125; pg. 140) His current base salary is $71,000. (Tr. 125) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
One of Applicant’s spouse’s relatives hired Applicant to recruit employees for 
firms, universities, and other entities following his release from imprisonment and a 
                                                                                                                                            
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). Applicant’s false statement to federal law enforcement officials is not recent, and it will 
not be considered for any purpose, except in the whole-person discussion. Applicant’s status as being on 
supervised probation will be considered in connection with assessing whether his Guideline J conduct is 
mitigated and under the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
halfway house. (Tr. 67) Applicant’s employment options were limited at that time 
because of his felony conviction, and he accepted the job, even though he had never 
worked in recruiting. His successes were inconsistent and sporadic. (Tr. 68) He 
accused his fellow employees of timecard fraud, and was ostracized by his coworkers. 
(Tr. 70-73, 108-109) When Applicant showed initiative, he was criticized. (Tr. 73-74, 
107-108) Nevertheless, he received a positive performance evaluation. (Tr. 75-77) 
Some other employees took credit for his successes, and he was not happy with his 
employment situation. (Tr. 70-77) In February 2013, his boss suggested that “it’s best 
that we just part ways” and promised not to do anything that would “obstruct any [of 
Applicant’s] future employment opportunities.” (Tr. 77, 111) Applicant collected his 
personal property from his desk and departed the building. (Tr. 78) 
 
Applicant’s March 15, 2013 SF 86 in Section 13A asked whether he “left by 
mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct” or “left by mutual 
agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance.” (GE 1) Applicant said, “no” 
to these two questions and explained in the section designated for providing the reason 
for leaving that employment, “I am family so my employer provided a job position to help 
provide financially for my family. I have over 20 years in the aviation field, and this was 
a new direction that in the end was not working.” (GE 1) Applicant provided accurate 
contact information to enable the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to verify his 
reason for leaving his employment. (GE 1) Applicant disclosed his felony-level 
conviction on this SF 86.  
 
Applicant conceded that he erroneously answered that he was not fired on his 
March 15, 2013 SF 86 when he was terminated from his airline employment as a result 
of his felony conviction. (Tr. 113) He did not intend to deceive anyone on his SF 86. (Tr. 
113, 120-121) The SOR did not allege the falsification of his SF 86 in connection with 
the termination of his airline employment.   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant described himself as a “stellar” airline employee, who received 
laudatory praise from his supervisors. (Tr. 79) Applicant had numerous flight 
certifications and licenses from his airline, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the 
Navy and Marine Corps. (Tr. 80-81; pg. 52) He received excellent evaluations from the 
airline employing him after he left active duty. (Tr. 46-47; pg. 8-43) Applicant has never 
had an accident while flying where someone was injured. (Tr. 82) He volunteered for 
and participated in a special federal program to protect aircraft and passengers. (Tr. 
183) He received numerous letters and certificates of training, appreciation, or 
commendation.  
 
A Navy flight surgeon with more than 20 years of medical and Navy experience, 
served with Applicant from 2001 to 2004 and has known him for many years. (Tr. 128-
134) The owner of an airline and flight school has employed Applicant and worked 
closely with him since early 2012. (Tr. 143-145) An airline pilot with more than 15 years 
flight experience has flown on numerous occasions with Applicant as his copilot over a 
five-year period. (Tr. 151-161) A Navy pilot, who recently retired from the Navy Reserve 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
as a commander, has known Applicant since 2004 or 2005. (Tr. 163-165) Applicant 
provided numerous letters attesting to his leadership, solid performance, and 
contributions to his employers. (pg. 44-51, 78-137) They described him as trustworthy, 
reliable, loyal, patriotic, honest, honorable, a devoted family man, having integrity, a 
model pilot, and a gifted aviator, and they recommended reinstatement of his security 
clearance. (Tr. 128-168; pg. 44-51, 78-137)        
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 
31(a) applies. Applicant pleaded guilty to two felonies: conspiracy to steal government 
property and structuring money transactions. He was sentenced to 21 months in prison 
and restitution of more than $140,000.  
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
  
Although none of the mitigating conditions fully apply, there are important 
mitigating factors. Applicant’s most recent offense occurred in November 2007, and is 
not particularly recent. He complied with all the terms of his probation. He has been 
continuously employed. He expressed regret and remorse concerning his offenses.  
 
Significant factors weighing against mitigating criminal conduct concerns remain. 
Applicant has not fully come to terms with his criminal conduct. See, e.g., note 2, supra. 
He engaged in a conspiracy with P resulting in the theft of more than $140,000 from the 
VA. P used a false claim in Applicant’s name for disability benefits to obtain these funds. 
Applicant engaged in a post-theft scheme to kickback P’s share by withdrawing $10,000 
blocks of funds from his account to avoid disclosure to federal banking officials. 
Applicant is well educated and trained as a Marine Corps officer. For 12 years he was 
steeped in the Marine Corps ethos and ethics. He knew it was wrong to steal from the 
VA. This crime was not a momentary lapse of judgment. It was a calculated plan that 
caused the VA to wrongfully pay over $140,000 in benefits to Applicant.    
 
Applicant is on supervised probation. See note 3, supra. The federal court has 
determined that the passage of more time under the limitations of probation is 
necessary to protect society and establish rehabilitation. More time must elapse before 
there is enough assurance that criminal conduct and other behavior raising security 
concerns is unlikely to recur. Applicant is not ready to be entrusted with access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR alleges that he has a 
debt of over $140,000 owed to the federal government as restitution for money he 
wrongfully received from the VA. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies because “there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control.” Applicant has a payment plan to address his debt of over 
$140,000 owed to the Government for restitution. Over $60,000 of the stolen funds went 
to P as a kickback and over $30,000 went to Applicant’s counsel. P is jointly responsible 
for payment of this restitution. Applicant is currently paying $600 a year, and at that rate 
he will never pay this debt. Nevertheless, the Department of Justice has not taken any 
action to obtain greater payments, and there is no evidence that the Government is 
dissatisfied with his payment arrangements. Applicant’s efforts are sufficient to fully 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct 
investigations,   . . . determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”  
 
Applicant’s March 15, 2013 SF 86 asked whether he “left by mutual agreement 
following charges or allegations of misconduct” or “left by mutual agreement following 
notice of unsatisfactory performance.” (GE 1) Applicant said, “no” to these two 
questions and explained in the section designated for providing the reason for leaving 
that employment, “I am family so my employer provided a job position to help provide 
financially for my family. I have over 20 years in the aviation field, and this was a new 
direction that in the end was not working.” (GE 1) Applicant provided accurate contact 
information to enable the OPM to verify his employment. Applicant disclosed his felony-
level conviction on this SF 86.  
 
Applicant gave sufficient information for the OPM investigator and DOD 
adjudicators to realize he was having problems in his employment and had a felony-
level conviction. Applicant disclosed the most important disqualifying information in his 
background, and any failure to more clearly describe other situations in his life were not 
designed to deceive the Government about his worthiness to have access to classified 
information. The allegations of intentional falsification of his 2013 SF 86, including the 
allegation that he lied about being terminated from his airline employment, are 
unsubstantiated because I do not believe he intended to deceive the Government about 
his employment history.   
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, F, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information; however, this evidence is not sufficient to mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant is 43 years old, and he is seeking employment from a defense contractor to 
enable him to continue his work in aviation. In 1994, he was awarded a bachelor of 
science degree in aero technology. He honorably served in the Marine Corps from 1992 
to 2004, including duty as a pilot and instructor pilot, and thereafter in the Navy 
Reserve. He received several awards for his aviation and leadership skills; he 
graduated on the Commandant’s list from an important training course; and in 2003, he 
was designated instructor pilot of the year for his squadron. He was involved in 
numerous military exercises between 1997 and 2004; he received two Navy and Marine 
Corps Commendation Medals and two National Defense Service Medals; and there 
were no allegations of security violations.  
 
Applicant received laudatory praise from his supervisors and colleagues in the 
Marine Corps and while working for an airline. He earned numerous flight certifications 
and licenses from his airline, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Navy and 
Marine Corps. He received excellent evaluations from the airline employing him after he 
left active duty.  He has never had an accident while flying where someone was injured. 
He volunteered for and participated in a special federal program to protect aircraft and 
passengers. He provided numerous letters and certificates of training, appreciation, or 
commendation.  
 
Four witnesses and numerous letters attest to his leadership, performance, and 
contributions to his employers. They described him as trustworthy, reliable, loyal, 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
patriotic, honest, honorable, a devoted family man, having integrity, a model pilot, and a 
gifted aviator, and they recommended reinstatement of his security clearance. 
 
Applicant was not the primary conspirator in the plan to defraud the VA. He 
pleaded guilty, which is often called an important step on the road to rehabilitation. He 
served one year of imprisonment, and he was a model prisoner, who helped other 
inmates with their basic education (studying for their GED). He has not violated 
probation, and he has complied with the Government’s payment plan for restitution.           
 
The factors weighing towards reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance are 
less substantial than the factors weighing against its reinstatement. Applicant’s 
background and experience as a Marine Corps commissioned officer and aviator 
provided more than a decade of training, instruction, and inculcation of values including 
integrity, fidelity, and honor. He was under significant family stress due to his daughter’s 
premature birth, concerns about his spouse’s health, damage to their residence from a 
tornado, and a heavy work schedule. Although these stressful conditions may have 
affected his decision-making process, they do not excuse his conduct. In 2007, 
Applicant and P conspired to commit theft from the VA, and Applicant wrongfully 
received over $140,000 from the VA. Although he had some hearing loss, he was well 
aware that his hearing loss was not significant enough to warrant such a large disability 
payment from the VA. He structured his bank transactions to conceal his $60,000 in 
kickback payments that he made to P. Applicant lied to federal law enforcement officials 
when he said his more than $60,000 kickback to P was a charitable contribution. He has 
two felony-level convictions, one for each count to which he pleaded guilty. He is 
currently on unsupervised probation. These are serious betrayals of the federal 
government and of other veterans. He showed very poor judgment and his access to 
classified information is not warranted.    
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. Unmitigated criminal conduct concerns lead me to conclude that 
reinstatement of a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This 
decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not 
attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the 
future. At some future date, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his worthiness for a security clearance.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
and personal conduct concerns are mitigated; however, Applicant has not carried his 
burden and criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion  
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
