 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02164 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges one delinquent mortgage 
account for $173,000. The debt was resolved through a short sale. He received the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) forms 1099-A and 1099-C from his mortgage creditor, 
and he filed appropriate documents with the IRS. All of his debts are current. He 
established he is financially responsible, and financial considerations concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (GE 1) On October 8,  2014, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as revised by the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 2006, which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On June 3, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On December 15, 
2014, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On December 18, 2014, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On January 7, 2015, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, 
setting the hearing for January 14, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and place of the 
hearing. (Tr. 18-19) Department Counsel offered four exhibits into evidence, which were 
admitted without objection. (Tr. 22-24; GE 1-4) Applicant offered 18 exhibits into 
evidence, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 25-31; AE A-R) I received the 
transcript of the hearing on January 23, 2015.     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted that at one time he owed the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a; however, he denied responsibility for it because it was resolved. Applicant 
also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and he has worked for a defense contractor since April 
2012. (Tr. 7, 10, 36-37) In 1995, he graduated from high school, and in 1999, he was 
awarded a bachelor’s of science degree in hazardous materials management. (Tr. 7-8) 
In 2000, he received a master’s degree in environmental management. (Tr. 7-8) He has 
never served in the military. (Tr. 8) Applicant married in 2012, and he has two children 
who are three years old and two years old. (Tr. 9) He was issued a security clearance in 
June 2012. (Tr. 37)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In February 2010, Applicant was involved in a near-fatal automobile accident. (Tr. 
31) He sustained a serious brain injury; he spent a month in the hospital; and then he 
needed a lengthy period to heal. (Tr. 32) He chose not to sue the trucking company that 
owned the truck that caused the accident. (Tr. 32-36) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owed $12,061 on a principal balance of about 
$173,000 for a mortgage. (SOR ¶ 1.a) In 2007, Applicant purchased a residence in 
state M for $173,000. (Tr. 40-41) The mortgage was for about $155,000. (Tr. 43) In 
2010, Applicant moved from state M to state O, and in 2011, he purchased a residence 
in state O for $170,000. (Tr. 43-45) In 2011, he listed his state M residence for sale. (Tr. 
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
47) He spent $8,000 to improve the property for the sale. (Tr. 48) Applicant was 
unemployed from January 2012 to April 2012. (Tr. 37-38) In February 2013, he wrote 
the creditor holding the mortgage on the state M property and described his efforts to 
sell the property, and he explained his financial situation. (Tr. 50-52) He told the creditor 
that he was unable to make payments on the mortgage. (Tr. 50-52) He told his security 
officer about defaulting on his state M mortgage. (Tr. 52) The state M property was sold 
in a short sale for $141,635 in August 2013. (Tr. 55) He received a 1099-A and 1099-C 
from the creditor. (Tr. 61; AE A-D) The difference between the mortgage, interest costs, 
transfer costs, and sales price was about $25,000. (Tr. 55) Applicant filed the necessary 
documents with the IRS to address a paper savings of $22,205 for Applicant on the 
transfer of the state M property. (Tr. 57-59, 80; AE A-D)       
 
Applicant is current on his state O mortgage, spouse’s student loans, vehicle 
loan, state and federal taxes, credit cards, and other debts. (Tr. 45, 62-73; AE F, G, I) 
He has no delinquent debts. (Tr. 62-73) He generated a budget. (Tr. 69-70; AE P)  
 
Applicant received positive evaluations from his employer. (Tr. 75; AE Q, R) He 
helped his employer successfully accomplish their mission. (Tr. 75-76) He described 
himself as a trustworthy and responsible person, who contributes to his company. (Tr. 
77) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, his SOR response, and hearing record. His SOR 
alleges a delinquent mortgage account for about $173,000. He was unable to pay his 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
state M mortgage as agreed, and the Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
                                            
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
  Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
to 20(d). His financial problems were affected by circumstances largely beyond his 
control. Applicant was seriously injured in an accident, was unemployed, and needed to 
move to state O.  
 
Once he was employed, he ensured all of his debts were current or resolved. 
Applicant is current on his state O mortgage, spouse’s student loans, vehicle loan, state 
and federal taxes, credit cards, and other debts. He has no delinquent debts. He 
generated a budget.3 He acted responsibly under the circumstances by maintaining 
contact with his creditors,4 making payments, and bringing or maintaining his debts in 
current status. Although he did not receive financial counseling, there are clear 
indications that the problem has been resolved and is under control. Applicant’s 
delinquent debt “occurred under such circumstances that [are] unlikely to recur and [do] 
not cast doubt on [his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
  The Appeal Board, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009), 
explained that a delinquent debt was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
                                            
3 Promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of 
paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 
07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Applicant admitted responsibility for and took reasonable and appropriate actions 
to resolve his SOR debt, establishing his good faith. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
Applicant did not dispute his responsibility for any debts. Applicant has done all that is 
reasonably possible for him to do to establish his financial responsibility. His efforts are 
sufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and he has worked a defense contractor since April 
2012. In 1999, he was awarded a bachelor’s of science degree in hazardous materials 
management, and in 2000, he received a master’s degree in environmental 
management. He is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his security 
responsibilities. He deserves some credit for volunteering to support the U.S. 
Government as an employee of a contractor. He received good evaluations for his work 
for his employer. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his 
employer. His financial problems were affected by circumstances largely beyond his 
control. He was seriously injured in an accident, was unemployed, and needed to move 
to state O. I give Applicant substantial credit for maintaining contact with his creditors, 
establishing payment plans, resolving his delinquent mortgage and filing the resolution 
documentation with the IRS, and either paying or bringing all of his debts to current 
status.     
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt resolution. I am confident he will continue to pay his debts and 
maintain his financial responsibility.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
