 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 14-00509 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Background of Case 
 
 On October 8, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 17, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 24, 2014, Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR in writing and elected 
to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 24, 2014, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on June 30, 2014. Applicant received the 
FORM on July 10, 2014, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted additional information within the time period. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the information. I marked that submission as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it into the record. On August 25, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.   
 
 On September 30, 2014, I issued a Decision denying Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance, on the basis that Applicant mitigated security concerns raised under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct, but not Guideline H, Drug Involvement. Applicant 
appealed. On January 13, 2015, the Appeal Board remanded the case to me to issue a 
Decision in accordance with the Directive. Specifically, the Appeal Board noted that the 
Decision found that Appellant began working for a defense contractor in June 2012 
rather than June 2013 as supported by the record. The Appeal Board limited the 
remand to that fact, the resulting finding that his marijuana use continued for ten months 
after he began working for a defense contractor, and “the emphasis that the Judge 
placed on these findings” in the analysis of the security concerns raised under Guideline 
H. I received the Remand Order and case file on January 15, 2015. 
 
Remand Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the two allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of 
the SOR, related to Drug Involvement. His admissions are incorporated into the findings 
of fact. He did not admit or deny the allegations in Paragraph 2 of the SOR. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He graduated from high school in June 2008. He 
graduated from college in August 2012. He began a position with a defense contractor 
in June 2013. In October 2013 he submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Item 4.) 
 
 In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana from September 2008 to 
April 2013. In September 2008, while in college, he began using marijuana. He 
purchased marijuana from November 2010 until December 2011. (Item 4.) In his April 
28, 2014 Answer, he asserted that while in college he used marijuana infrequently and 
for recreational purposes. He claimed he had not used marijuana for the past year, 
which he stated is an “appropriate period of abstinence.” (Item 3.) He moved and no 
longer associated with the individuals with whom he used the illegal substance. (Item 3; 
AE A.) In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated he has continued to abstain from 
use of marijuana. He is passionate about his position, in which he works with military 
service members and their families. He would agree to an automatic revocation of his 
security clearance should he abuse illegal drugs in the future. (AE A.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 During an interview with a Government investigator in November 2013, Applicant 
stated he has never been arrested for using marijuana nor had a positive drug 
screening. He further stated to the Government investigator that there is nothing in his 
background or regarding his character that could result in exploitation, blackmail, or 
coercion, including his illegal use and purchase of marijuana. (Item 3.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include:  
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The potentially disqualifying conditions established by the evidence in this 
case are:   
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Applicant admitted that he illegally used marijuana from September 2008 until 
April 2013. He purchased it between November 2010 and December 2011. The 
evidence raises both disqualifying conditions. 
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security concern under 
this guideline. AG ¶ 26 includes four examples of conditions that could mitigate the 
security concern arising from illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
5 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
 clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply because Applicant used an illegal substance, 
marijuana, from September 2008 to April 2013. He stated he stopped using marijuana 
two months before starting employment with a defense contractor, but provided no 
independent evidence supporting his assertion. His four-year history of illegal behavior, 
which continued up to two months before starting his present position, casts doubt on 
his trustworthiness and judgment.  
In his Answer and response to the FORM, Applicant asserted he has not used 
marijuana for over a year. He said he no longer associates with individuals who use 
marijuana, supporting a limited application of AG ¶ 25(b)(1). He did not provide 
information regarding whether he still frequents the places where he used marijuana. 
Insufficient evidence was submitted to warrant the application of AG ¶¶ 25(b)(2) and (3). 
Applicant’s written agreement to have his security clearance revoked for future illegal 
drug abuse merits limited mitigation under AG ¶ 25(b)(4). The record does not contain 
evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 25(c). Applicant has not participated in 
substance abuse treatment or received a favorable prognosis by a qualified medical 
professional, which evidence is necessary for the application of AG ¶ 25(d).  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Paragraph 2 of the SOR alleges that Applicant’s illegal purchase and use of 
marijuana raises security concerns under this guideline. While all misconduct involves 
elements of questionable judgment, Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement is 
appropriately raised under Guideline H. Paragraph 2 of the SOR did not recite any 
additional facts that would serve as a basis for alleging security concerns under 
Guideline E. Hence, allegations raised under this guideline are found in Applicant’s 
favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a 
defense contractor, who illegally used marijuana between 2008 and 2013. His personal 
assertions that he will not use marijuana in the future, and has not used it for over a 
year, are not sufficiently persuasive to outweigh the evidence documenting that he used 
marijuana for over four years; purchased it for a year; and ceased using it two months 
before starting new employment that required a security clearance. There is insufficient 
evidence corroborating that he no longer uses illegal substances or that he does not 
have a substance abuse problem.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement. The allegations raised under the Personal Conduct guideline are found in 
his favor. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                 
     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
