                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 14-02982
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(E-QIP) on March 21, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On July 30, 2014, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the
Department of Defense (DoD) could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 4, 2014, and he requested an
administrative hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative
Judge on October 27, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued on October 27, 2014, and
the hearing was scheduled for December 4, 2014.  At the hearing the Government
presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were
admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented no exhibits at the hearing.  He
called one witness.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open
following the hearing until December 26, 2014, to allow the Applicant to submit
2
additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted sixteen Post-Hearing Exhibits
which were admitted into evidence without objection, and are referred to as
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 16.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on December 15, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 46 years old and married with three children.  He has a high school
diploma and two years of college.  He holds the position of Senior Field Engineer for a
defense contractor.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with
this employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on
the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at
risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline, except 1.j., 1.k., 1.t., 1.u., 1.x., and 1.y.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated March 27, 2013; June 4, 2014; October 20,
2014, and November 29, 2014, reflect that at one time Applicant was indebted to the
creditors set forth in the SOR totaling approximately $40,000.  (Government Exhibits
3, 4, 5 and 6.)  
 
Applicant joined the United States Navy in January 1990 and served honorably
for ten years, until he medically retired in December 1999.  During his military career
he received numerous awards, decorations and commendations for his outstanding
service.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 2.)  Applicant was never subject to any
military discipline, nor did he ever commit a security clearance violation while in the
Navy.  (Tr. p. 90.)  During his military service, he never financially over-extended
himself.  While still in the military, Applicant was offered a great job opportunity by a
defense contractor.  He accepted the job once he was discharged from the Navy.        
In 1998, while still on active duty, Applicant injured his achilles tendon and had
to have surgery.  When he got out of the military in 1999, because of scar tissue that
had become a problem, Applicant had to have a second surgery on his achilles
tendon.  Unable to exercise for a sustained period of time, Applicant gained weight.  In
2006, Applicant was diagnosed with Type-2 diabetes.  At some point, he began to
have pain in his leg which was ultimately diagnosed as a tumor.  After two biopsies,
Applicant had to undergo another surgery to remove the tumor.  At this time,
Applicant’s wife was not employed outside of the home.  Applicant missed a significant
3
amount of work due to his illnesses and accumulated medical debt that he could not
afford to pay.  The vast majority of the delinquent debts that are set forth in the SOR
are his medical bills.  (Tr. p. 30.)
  
Applicant’s wife testified that she has always handled the family finances and
plans to continue doing so.  She has been proactive since the beginning of their
financial difficulties.    They are currently working to resolve their delinquent debt. She
has been in contact with their creditors and has been either setting up payment plans
and/or making payments.  In the event that everything remains constant, continued
full-time employment and no more medical problems preventing him from performing
his job, Applicant plans to have all of his delinquent debts paid off in three to six
months.  (Tr. p. 48.)  
The Applicant is now back to work full time and is earning $96,000 annually.
He also receives VA benefits of $485 monthly.  His wife is now employed and earning
$83,000 annually.  Their combined income provides sufficient monies to pay their
current bills as well as their delinquent debts.  Applicant and his wife no longer have
any credit cards, as they pay cash for what they need.  They recently downsized from
a more expensive home to a smaller apartment to free up more cash in order to tackle
their debt.  (Tr. p. 33.)  
The following delinquent debts have either been paid in full, are being paid
through a structured payment plan, or remain owing at this time but will be paid within
the next few months.  1.a.  A delinquent debt to Capital One Auto that was past due in
the amount of $962, with a total balance of $15,782, is now current.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit 3.)  1.b.  A medical debt that was past due in the amount of $1,757
has been paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 4.)  1.c.  A delinquent student
loan debt in the amount of $1,559 is scheduled to begin payments of $50 monthly on
January 9, 2015.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 5.)  1.d.  A delinquent debt owed
to Capital One in the amount of $770 has been paid in full.  Applicant made two
payments of $419.68 toward the debt on November 10, 2014, and December 10,
2014.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 6.)  
A number of medical debts have been consolidated for payment under the
California Business Bureau, Inc.  These delinquent accounts are set forth in 1.e., 1.f.,
1.h., 1k., 1.i., 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., 1.r., and 1.s of the SOR.  Applicant’s first
payment of $550 is due on January 10, 2015.  (See, Applicant’s Exhibit 7.)  1.e.  A
medical debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $670.  1.f.  A medical
debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $646.  1.h.  A medical debt on an
account that is past due in the amount of $305.  1.k.  A medical debt on an account
that is past due in the amount of $194.  1.l.  A medical debt on an account that is past
due in the amount of $175.  1.m.  A medical debt on an account that is past due in the
amount of $169.  1.n.  A medical debt on an account that is past due in the amount of
$119.  1.o.  A medical debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $107.  1.p.
A medical debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $93.  1.q.  A medical
debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $58.  1.r.  A medical debt on an
4
account that is past due in the amount of $40.  1.s.  A medical debt on an account that
is past due in the amount of $26.   
1g.  A delinquent debt owed to Credit One Bank for an account that is 120 days
past due in the approximate amount of $500 is now current.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit 8.)  1.i.  A medical debt on an account that is past due in the amount of $280
has been paid in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 9.)  1.j.  A delinquent debt
owed to Capital One for a charged off account in the amount of $268 has a zero
balance as of December 12, 2014.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 10.) 1.t.  A state
tax lien in the amount of $9,934 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 11.) 
1.w.  A delinquent debt owed to Midland Funding for a past due account in the amount
of $362 was settled on November 26, 2014.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 7.)  1.x.
A delinquent debt that was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $214
has been paid.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 12.)  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit 12.)  1.z.  A medical debt that was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $87 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 13.)  1.aa.  A medical
debt that was placed for collection in the approximate amount of $79 has been paid.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 14.1.ee.  A medical debt that was placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $33 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit 15.)  Applicant has submitted proof of payment for one additional medical bill.
It is unclear from the documentation what debt it pertain to in the SOR.  (See,
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 16.)
The following debts remain outstanding and need to be addressed.  Applicant
indicates that he plans to pay them within the next few months.  1.u.  A medical debt
placed in collections in the amount of $568.  1.v.  A medical debt that was placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $368. 1.y.  A medical debt that was placed for
collection in the approximate amount of $214. 1.bb.  A medical debt that was placed
for collection in the approximate amount of $62.  1.cc.  A medical debt that was placed
for collection in the approximate amount of $46.  1.dd.  A medical debt that was placed
for collection in the approximate amount of $42.  
Letters of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant from
professional colleagues, both military and civilian, who have known and or worked
with the Applicant for more than ten years, and one from a deacon in his church,
indicate that Applicant’s performance, honesty, integrity and devotion to duty are
beyond reproach in all aspects.  Applicant is said to perform superior work, be highly
professional, well respected, dedicated, and a team player.  He is considered to be
trustworthy, reliable, and loyal to the United States.  He is highly recommended for a
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1.)                  
5
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.  
Applicant completed a security clearance application dated March 21, 2013,
Section 26 which asked, “In the past seven years, have you had a lien placed against
your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?”  The Applicant answered, “NO,”
to the question.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  This was a false response.  He failed to list
the lien that was placed against him set forth in 1.t., of the SOR.  Applicant claims that
at the time he completed the security clearance application he knew nothing about a
lien and in fact the lien was imposed sometime later.  He states that if he would have
known about the lien he would have revealed it.  (Tr. p. 95.)
Section 26 also asked, “In the past seven years, have you had bills or debts
turned over to a collection agency? Are you currently over 120 days delinquent on any
debt?”  The Applicant answered, “NO,” to both questions.  (Government Exhibit 1.)
These were false responses.  He failed to disclose the delinquent debts set forth in
subparagraphs 1.t., through 1.ee. above.  Applicant explained that he did not intend to
conceal anything from the Government when he answered these questions.  He knew
he had some delinquent debts, but he also knew that he was working to resolve them.
He completed the application quickly, without thinking carefully, did not take it home,
as it had been in his work mailbox for several days before he got it.  Since it had a
time stamp of urgency on it, he completed it to the best of his ability, and submitted it
that very day.    (Tr. pp. 95-96.)  He regrets answering the questions without being
accurate, but states that it was not intentional.   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.
An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds. 
6
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
7
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudication process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
8
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, and/or dishonesty,
which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F) and that he appears to have
dishonest on his security clearance application (Guideline E.)  This evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that Applicant’s experienced a series of health problems
beginning in 1998 that continuing until just recently, that caused his financial
indebtedness.  Until then, he had demonstrated financial responsibility and paid his
bills on time.  Since his health problems have now been taken care of, and his wife has
started working, Applicant has been resolving his delinquent debt.  He has downsized
his home and reduced his expenses in order to free up more money to pay off his debt
more rapidly.  Presently, he has paid off some of his debt, and is making payments to
resolve the others.  Accordingly to his financial payment plan, he will be completely
debt free in three to six months.      
Under the circumstances, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve his
debts.  He understands that he must remain fiscally responsible if he is to hold a
security clearance.  He has not incurred any new debt that he cannot afford to pay, and
he is working to resolve his delinquent debts.  There is clear evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  However, in the event that he cannot meet his financial obligations, or if
he does not completely resolve his current outstanding debt, his security clearance will
be immediately in jeopardy.  Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
9
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d)
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
 In regard to his personal conduct, I find that he did not intentionally conceal his
delinquent debts from the Government on his security clearance application when he
answered the questions in Section 26.  As he stated, he was under pressure to
complete the application, and he did not take it home or check with his wife about the
particulars of their finances.  He should have.  He now knows that in the future, to be
accurate, he must pay particular attention to each question and if necessary, he must
consult with his wife about the particulars of their finances.  I find that he was careless
in completing the application, but that he did not deliberately attempt to conceal the
information from the Government on the application.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented, including his favorable letters of
recommendation and his dedicated military service.  Overall, it mitigates the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subparas.  1.a.: through 1.ee.    For the Applicant.
       
10
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
        Subpara. 2.a.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara. 2.b.: For the Applicant.
 
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
