 Exhibit 1 (for ease of understanding, it will be referred to as a security clearance application or simply an1
application). 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-02536
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 62-year-old aerospace engineer, Applicant
is a native-born citizen of Egypt who has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1987 and
a cleared employee working in the defense industry since 1990. He met his burden to
present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the foreign influence and foreign
preference security concerns stemming from his ties or connections to Egypt.
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on February 24, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Exhibit 1. 4
2
(DOD),  on August 22, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the3
reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline B for foreign
influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. He answered the SOR in writing on
August 26, 2014, by admitting the allegations and providing explanations.        
The case was assigned to me November 12, 2014, to conduct the hearing
requested by Applicant. The hearing was held as scheduled on December 11, 2014.
The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received December 22, 2014.
The record was kept open for a brief period after the hearing to allow Applicant to
provide a résumé or curriculum vitae, and he did so in a timely manner. It is admitted
without objections as Applicant’s Exhibit C.   
Findings of Fact
1. Applicant’s educational and employment history 
Applicant is a 62-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance
previously granted to him; he was first granted a security clearance in 1990; and his
most recent security clearance was granted in 2004.  An aerospace engineer by training4
and experience, he is employed by a federal contractor that provides space-launch
services to the U.S. Government. 
Applicant was born and raised in Egypt. He earned a bachelor’s degree in
aerospace engineering from an Egyptian university in 1975. He was then required to
serve about 14 months of military service. He has no additional obligations or
connections to the Egyptian military. He then spent a brief period working in Egypt for
an industrial organization until he decided to further his education in France. 
Applicant enrolled as a student at a French aerospace engineering school. He
was awarded his initial degree in 1980 and then earned a doctorate degree in 1982.
While as student, he was employed as a teaching assistant at the school and as a
 Exhibit C. 5
 Tr. 77–79.6
3
research assistant for a French governmental agency. He has no additional obligations
or connections to either entity.
Having previously visited family in the United States, Applicant immigrated here
to pursue a career in aerospace engineering. He has worked for U.S. aviation or
aerospace companies since 1983.  He has been employed by his current employer or5
its predecessor in interest since 1994. His employment history as reflected in his
résumé includes publication of five professional articles and three U.S. patents.  
2. Applicant’s family ties to the United States and Egypt  
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1987. His wife is also a naturalized
citizen, and their three children are native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant met his wife
through a mutual friend when she was visiting the United States. They married in the
United States in 1986, and they have since continuously resided here. They have lived
at the same residential address since 1994. Although his wife is also an Egyptian
citizen, she was born in Kuwait and lived most of her early life in that country because
that is where her father was employed teaching English. His wife is employed as a
paraprofessional by a local school district. 
Applicant’s three children are all young adults. Because Applicant is an Egyptian
citizen, by operation of Egyptian law, his three children are dual citizens of the United
States and Egypt. The oldest child has recently opened up her own business, the
second child is pursuing a joint degree in law and business (JD/MBA), and the youngest
child is a college student.
Applicant’s father, who was a professor of medicine, passed away when
Applicant was a young child. Afer his father’s death, Applicant’s mother finished her
education and obtained employment for a governmental agency concerned with
planning. She worked there until she retired in 1990. Applicant has had regular contact
with his mother via telephone conversations. Since she had a minor stroke within the
last year, he now calls his 80-plus-year-old mother nearly every day to check on her
well being.  
Applicant now has more contact with his older brother than in the past because
that brother is living with his mother in Egypt. His older brother retired in 2011 after
working many years for a governmental agency concerned with promoting foreign trade.
Applicant stated that his mother and brother live in a safe and upscale neighborhood of
a major city in Egypt.6
Applicant’s younger brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen and has been a
practicing physician in the United States for many years. His younger brother has two
 Tr. 50–51. 7
 Tr. 51; Exhibit 2. 8
 Exhibit 3. 9
 Exhibit 3.10
 Exhibit 1. 11
 Exhibits 2. 12
 Exhibit 3. 13
 Tr. 58. 14
4
children, both native-born U.S. citizens; one child is a physician; and the other child
works in public health.   
In addition to his immediate family, Applicant has extended family in the United
States consisting of aunts, uncles, nieces, and nephews.  All the children are native-7
born U.S. citizens.  
Applicant’s wife comes from a large family with seven children. Applicant’s father-
in-law and mother-in-law are deceased. Applicant’s six brothers-in-law are Egyptian
citizens; three are living in Egypt; two are living in the United States as dual citizens;
and one is believed to be deceased.  Applicant has infrequent (annually to quarterly)8
contact with his brothers-in-law.
3. Applicant’s financial interests in the United States and Egypt
Although the vast majority of his financial interests are in the United States,
Applicant has some financial interests in Egypt. In 1975, he bought an apartment in a
complex that was then under construction in Egypt.  He addressed the apartment during9
his previous background investigation in 2003;  he reported ownership of the apartment10
in his March 2013 security clearance application;  and he provided additional details11
during the security clearance process.  12
Applicant estimates that he made a down payment of about U.S. $3,000 and
then paid an additional $15,000 to $20,000 for construction costs. As of 2003, the
apartment complex was not fully completed.  He bought the apartment before he went13
to France with the idea he would live there when he married.  He has never lived in the14
apartment, and the apartment has never been leased to tenants as an income-
producing property. His ballpark estimate is that the apartment has a value of about
 Tr. 59–60; Exhibit 2. 15
 Tr. 60; Exhibit B. 16
 Tr. 86–89. 17
 Exhibit 2. 18
 Tr. 62–71, 80–85. 19
 Exhibits 1 and 2. 20
 Tr. 62–63. 21
 Exhibit 1. 22
5
$70,000,  which he thinks is about a tenth of the value of his family home in the United15
States.  16
Applicant opened a bank account in Egypt during his most recent trip there in
2013.  He did so to receive a $60 monthly payment from an Egyptian engineering17
professional association or group for which he qualified at age 60. He estimates the
account has a balance of about $1,000.  He has never drawn on the account, but his18
daughter may have drawn on it during a trip to Egypt. The empty apartment, the bank
account, and the $60 monthly retirement stipend are the entirety of his financial
interests in Egypt. All other financial interests, to including the family home and
retirement accounts, are in the United States. 
4. Applicant’s record of voting in Egyptian elections
Applicant voted two or three times by mail-in ballot in Egyptian elections in 2011
and 2012.  He disclosed those votes in his March 2013 security clearance application19
and provided additional details during the security clearance process.  Previously, he20
had not voted in Egyptian elections since before immigrating to the United States.  21
Applicant has endeavored to explain why he voted in Egyptian elections when he
completed the security clearance application, in response to interrogatories, in response
to the SOR, and during the hearing. Uniformly or consistently, he has stated that he
voted to promote Egypt’s stability. For example, in his security clearance application, he
briefly explained that he voted because Egypt’s stability is important to the Middle East
and North Africa.  22
In response to interrogatories in July 2014, Applicant explained he voted after the
2011 revolution in Egypt to promote the country’s stability, which is important to the
Middle East, North Africa, and the world, and he believed that voting was consistent
with the interests of the United States. He further explained that he “may” vote in an
Egyptian election in the future “if I think it is important enough and I can easily do it. At
this time voting by mail is no longer allowed and I won’t travel to [the location of an
 Exhibit 2. 23
 Tr. 63. 24
 Tr. 63.25
 Tr. 65–66. 26
 Tr. 80–81.27
 Exhibit B at 4 (internal citations omitted). 28
6
Egyptian consulate in the United States] to cast a ballot. I did not vote for the
constitution or the latest presidential election” in Egypt in May 2014.23
In response to the SOR in August 2014, he stated that he voted in 2011 and
2012, which was a critical time in Egypt, in light of encouragement he believed the  U.S.
Government was providing to promote free and fair elections. He further stated that
voting by mail is no longer allowed and he will not travel to vote. He also stated he was
willing to promise to never vote in an Egyptian election if such a condition was
acceptable regardless of the circumstances of an election in Egypt. 
During the hearing, Applicant explained that the 2011 revolution was a significant
event and was the circumstance that led him to vote.  He explained his reasoning as24
follows:
Egypt is, has a lot of influence in the area, and has a lot of influence in
what’s happening in the whole world now. People that are claiming to be
Islamists, that they know what is right and what is wrong, those guys have
affected what’s happening in the world now to a great extent. So what
happens in Egypt when there is such a big change, what happened after
the revolution, is a U.S. concern. If affects you, it affects all of us. It affects
the world.25
He also explained that his vote when combined with the votes of other citizens living
outside of Egypt had symbolic importance to those living in Egypt.  In other words, he26
believes it is important for those who live in a democracy to practice democracy by
voting. 
Applicant further explained that he believed that the U.S. Government
encouraged Egyptian citizens to vote.  He presented documentary evidence27
suggesting that the United States has encouraged voting in Egypt.  In particular, he28
presented information from the U.S. Embassy in Egypt discussing U.S. support for
Egypt’s democratic transition, including providing $65 million to facilitate the transition,
including U.S.-supported programs to raise “public awareness about the voting process
 Exhibit B (Document entitled Supporting Egypt’s Democratic Transition from the U.S. Embassy) (emphasis29
added). 
 Tr. 82–83. 30
 Tr. 83. 31
 Tr. 85. 32
 This information is gleaned from Department Counsel’s request for administrative, which was granted, and33
documentary matters presented by Applicant. See Exhibits 4 and B. 
7
and encourage all Egyptians, especially women and youth, to vote through education
initiatives.”29
While acknowledging that he had indicated that he may vote in the future if doing
so was relatively easy, Applicant stated he does not believe that he will vote in an
Egyptian election again.  He explained when he voted in 2011 and 2012, he did not30
appreciate that voting might raise an issue with his security clearance, and had he been
aware of the concern, he may not have voted.  He then stated that he did not plan to31
vote in Egyptian elections.    32
5. Background information on Egypt33
Egypt is a major country in the Arab world. The United States has had diplomatic
relations with Egypt since the country gained independence from protectorate status
under the United Kingdom, and the two countries share a relationship based on mutual
interest in Middle East peace and stability, revitalizing the Egyptian economy and
strengthening trade relations, and promoting regional security. Egypt has been a key
U.S. partner in ensuring regional stability and on a wide range of common security
issues, including countering terrorism. A core objective of U.S. policy toward Egypt is
supporting a successful transition, which was launched in 2011, to democracy and
economic stability. Egypt is one of several countries, such as Australia, Israel, Japan,
and New Zealand, that has been designated a major non-NATO ally for purposes of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act.
The United States is facing complex questions about the future of U.S.-Egypt
relations in light of the unrest and violence that occurred in Egypt in 2013 when the
military ousted then President Morsi from office. In August 2013, the Egyptian
government declared a state of emergency, which the Obama Administration
denounced as well as strongly condemning the ongoing violence in Egypt. To that end,
there has been a marked increase in terrorism and violent extremism following the
removal of the president in 2013. Egypt’s human-rights record is also a concern due to,
among other things, excessive use of force by security forces, suppression of civil
liberties, and military trials of civilians. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to34
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.35
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 36
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 37
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).38
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.39
8
Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers to be Egyptian citizens even
if they were not issued an Egyptian birth certificate or passport. Persons with dual
nationality who travel to Egypt on their Egyptian passports are normally treated as
Egyptian citizens by the government. 
6. Applicant’s credibility during the hearing
Applicant was serious and respectful throughout the hearing, and he answered
questions in an open and honest way without hesitation. I was favorably impressed by
Applicant and had no concerns about his credibility. Likewise, concerning his voting in
Egyptian elections, his explanations for doing so were not inconsistent or contrary.
Instead, recognizing his academic training and years of experience as an aerospace
engineer, I found his explanations overall consistent in light of his effort to explain
himself with a high degree of precision on matters outside of his subject-matter
expertise.   
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As34
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt35
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An36
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  37
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting38
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An39
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.40
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.41
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 42
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).43
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.44
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 45
9
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate40
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  41
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s42
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.43
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it44
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
1. The foreign influence concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s ties to Egypt
disqualify him from eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt45
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
 AG ¶ 6. 46
10
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.46
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s ties to Egypt, I have especially considered the following disqualifying
conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information; and
AG ¶ 7(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owened or foreign-operated business, which
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation. 
Based on the circumstances surrounding the 2011 revolution and the removal of the
president in 2013, Egypt meets the heightened-risk standard in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e). 
Applicant’s family ties to Egypt are sufficient to raise a concern. Although most of
his family is now living in the United States, Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens
of and residents in Egypt. Both are retired from careers working for the government.
And Applicant has three brothers-in-law who are citizens of and residents in Egypt. His
relationship with those men appears rather distant, but there is a presumption of some
closeness or obligation via his wife’s relationship with her brothers. In addition to the
family ties, Applicant has financial interests in Egypt consisting of the empty apartment
valued at about $70,000, the bank account, and the $60 monthly retirement stipend, the
latter two being established in 2013. Taken together, his family ties and financial
interests are sufficient to justify further review.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
11
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the
individual.
Applicant is a successful aerospace engineer who has spent decades working in
the U.S. aviation and aerospace industries. He has held a security clearance during
most of those years. He has lived, worked, and raised a family in the United States for
the last 30-plus years. His ties or connections to his immediate family members and in-
laws in Egypt are about what you would expect given the time and distance between
them. He’s doing his best to be a good son to his mother, who has been a widow since
his early childhood. He has an ongoing relationship with an older brother who lives with
his mother. Otherwise, the bulk of his family ties, both immediate and extended, are to
people here in the United States. Although his financial interests in Egypt are not de
minimis, those interests are insignificant compared to his U.S. financial interests. By
example, the value of his Egyptian apartment is estimated to be a tenth of the value of
his family home, and this does not account for his other U.S. financial interests. And
both the bank account and the $60 monthly retirement stipend from the Egyptian
engineering association are of a routine nature and are unlikely to be used effectively
against Applicant in a foreign-influence context. Taken together, his family, employment,
and financial ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to Egypt.   
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to and financial interests in Egypt. Those
circumstances should not be dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic,
especially considering  the recent troubles in Egypt and the U.S. concerns about the risk
those troubles present. With that said, Applicant’s connections to Egypt are outweighed
by his family, employment, and financial ties to the United States. On balance, I am
satisfied that this is not a case of “divided loyalties,” with an applicant who has one foot
in each country, as contemplated by the guideline. Instead, I am satisfied that Applicant
has had both feet firmly planted in the United States for many years and those ties are
now quite strong. Any security risk or concern presented by his ties to Egypt is
outweighed and overcome by his much stronger ties to the United States. 
 AG ¶¶ 9, 10, and 11 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 47
 AG ¶ 9.48
12
2. The foreign preference concern
The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline C is whether Applicant’s voting in
Egyptian elections in 2011 and 2012 disqualifies him from eligibility for access to
classified information. Under Guideline C for foreign influence,  the suitability of an47
applicant may be questioned or put into doubt due to actions that indicate a foreign
preference. The overall concern is:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.48
Given the undisputed evidence that Applicant voted two to three times in
Egyptian elections in 2011 and 2012 and the circumstances surrounding his voting, the
following disqualifying and mitigating conditions are most pertinent: 
AG ¶ 10(a)(7) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship
of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: voting in a foreign
election; and
AG ¶ 11(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United
States Government. 
Voting in a foreign election is an exercise of foreign citizenship and such action
raises a genuine security concern. The DOD was justified in inquiring into Applicant’s
voting in 2011 and 2012 and setting forth its concern in the SOR. Having considered his
explanations for voting, I am persuaded that his voting was largely influenced or
motivated by a confluence of unusual if not historic events in his country of birth as
opposed to a strong desire to exercise dual citizenship. Added to those events was the
circumstance of the ease of voting by mail, an option that Applicant understands is no
longer available. 
Moreover, Applicant believed his voting was consistent with U.S. interests and he
further believed voting was encouraged by the United States. Although Applicant’s
beliefs are subjective, in light of the information from the U.S. Embassy in Egypt, as
noted in the findings of fact, a reasonable person could believe that voting was
encouraged by the United States. 
I also accept Applicant’s explanation that he did not appreciate that voting might
raise an issue with his security clearance, and had he been aware of the concern, he
 AG ¶ 2(e)(1) and (2). 49
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).50
13
may not have voted. And I am persuaded that he has no intention of voting in Egyptian
elections in the future. By example, as noted in the findings of fact, he did not vote in the
most recent presidential election in May 2014, which was several months before the
SOR was issued. 
I also considered that Applicant voluntarily reported the information about his
voting, and he was truthful, complete, and cooperative in responding to questions.  It is49
likely that the DOD would be unaware of Applicant’s voting but for his candor in
reporting the information in his application. By reporting the information, he did exactly
what is expected of a person who is currently eligible for access to classified
information. 
Applicant met his burden to present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate
the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns stemming from his ties or
connections to Egypt. I have no doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, good
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of50
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
14
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
