 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02733 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 6, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
in debt to four creditors in the approximate amount of $47,167. His rental property was 
foreclosed upon in 2011. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2011, but it 
was dismissed in February 2012. He has acted responsibly with respect to his debts by 
resolving them all. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on October 27, 2014, and then was reassigned to me on 
December 10, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on December 10, 2014, scheduling the hearing for January 6, 2015. It 
was rescheduled on December 11, 2014, for hearing on January 8, 2015. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. The record was left open for receipt of additional documents. On 
January 19, 2015; January 20, 2015; February 2, 2015; and February 4, 2015, Applicant 
presented AE F through AE J. Department Counsel had no objections to AE F through 
AE J and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on January 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer since November 2009. He is married and has no children. He possesses a 
bachelor’s degree awarded in 2000. (GE 1; Tr. 53.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to four creditors in the 
approximate amount of $47,167. The Government also expressed concerns over a 
2011 foreclosure and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition that was filed in November 2011, 
but dismissed in February 2012. Applicant admitted allegations 1.a, 1.e, and 1.f. He 
denied allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, because he resolved them. His debts, foreclosure, 
and bankruptcy filing are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to a series of unforeseen events. 
In 2005, he was living and working in another state. He purchased a home there for 
$440,000. He financed the purchase with a down payment of $45,000, a primary 
mortgage of $355,000, and a second mortgage of $44,000.1 He lost his job in 2007 and 
moved in with his parents in his present state of residence. He leased the house to 
tenants, but it had several periods of vacancy in 2007 to 2008, which caused Applicant 
financial strain. Applicant found employment in 2008 and was then able to negotiate a 
lower interest rate with the mortgage company. In 2009, he found a better job and he 
moved out of his parent’s home. He began renting an apartment near his job. His 
tenants were paying their rent and he was financially stable. He invested in two beauty 
salons with his business partner. However, in 2010, one of his beauty salon ventures 
faltered. At the same time, his tenants moved out and he was unable to pay the 
mortgages on his property. He was unable to sell the property because the value of the 
house had declined due to the economic downturn. Despite his economic problems at 
the time, he was somehow able to take a cruise to Grand Cayman and Jamaica in 
                                                          
1 SOR allegation 1.f pertains to the foreclosure of this property by the primary mortgage holder. SOR 
allegation 1.e pertains to the second mortgage on this home. 
 
3 
 
November 2010. (GE 2.) The house was foreclosed upon by the bank in July 2011. He 
testified that he received a 1099-C issued to him by the primary lender after the 
foreclosure. (Tr. 21-25, 28-30, 35-36, 47-50.) 
 
He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2011, as stated in SOR allegation 
1.a, after he realized the depth of his financial problems resulting from the salon’s 
failure. Not only was he indebted to the creditors identified in the SOR, but he also had 
other delinquent accounts at that time including two judgments. (GE 2.) He testified he 
had the Chapter 7 bankruptcy dismissed when he realized that he would receive an 
income tax refund of $20,000 for the 2011 tax year that he could use toward repaying 
his delinquencies. However, he claimed in his March 27, 2012 subject interview that the 
bankruptcy was dismissed because he “had forgotten when his court date was and was 
on business travel.” (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 21-25, 39.)  
 
Since 2012, Applicant has slowly satisfied each of his delinquent debts, including 
those listed in the SOR.2 (Tr. 21-25, 39.) His paid debts include the following: 
 
Applicant was indebted on a credit card in the amount of $1,080, as stated in 
SOR allegation 1.b. He presented a letter from this creditor that shows he satisfied this 
debt on September 26, 2012. This debt is resolved. (AE D; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a credit card in the amount of $1,931, as stated in 
SOR allegation 1.c. He presented a letter from this creditor that shows he satisfied this 
debt on October 21, 2014. This debt is resolved. (AE C; Tr. 34.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent for a telecommunications company 
in the amount of $56, as stated in SOR allegation 1.d. This debt was for a cable modem 
that the telecommunications company claimed had not been returned. Applicant sent 
the company the receipt he had from the return of the modem, and the collection 
company sent him a letter acknowledging that the account has been satisfied. This debt 
is resolved. (AE B; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on his second mortgage, discussed above, in the amount 
of $44,100, as stated in SOR allegation 1.e. Applicant testified that he did not realize 
that he was liable for the second mortgage after the house was foreclosed upon. 
However, once he was made aware of this continuing delinquency, he contacted this 
creditor. The creditor offered to accept a settlement of $2,500 on this account. On 
January 23, 2015, Applicant made a payment of $2,500 to this creditor. The creditor 
sent Applicant a letter dated January 28, 2015, that shows this debt as “paid in full.” 
This debt is resolved. (AE H; AE I; AE J; Tr. 25, 30, 45, 47.) 
 
When Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, he completed the requisite 
financial counseling. He testified that the counseling helped him learn to budget his 
expenses. He presented a copy of his monthly budget for January 2014 to December 
                                                          
2 Applicant has also satisfied the two judgments and two personal loans. (GE 2.)  
 
4 
 
2014. It shows that Applicant has a surplus each month of between $1,500 to $11,310.3 
No new delinquencies appear on his credit report. (GE 8; AE A; AE E; Tr. 51-52.) 
 
Applicant continues to own one beauty salon, but has no financial liabilities for 
the business other than paying its monthly rent of $1,700. The business is successful 
and either breaks even or has a small monthly profit. (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
Applicant’s colleague and personal friend wrote a letter of support on Applicant’s 
behalf. He believes Applicant is trustworthy, exercises good judgment, and has integrity. 
Applicant’s work performance appraisals reflect he is a valued employee. (AE F; AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
3 This figure does not include Applicant’s wife income. Applicant explained that he and his wife keep their 
finances separate. She has her own money that she earned from the sale of her separate business. (Tr. 
53, 57.) 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was in debt to four creditors in the approximate amount of $47,167. He 
also lost a home to foreclosure in 2011, and filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 
2011, but dismissed it in February 2012. The evidence raises both security concerns, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 fully apply:  
 
(c) the person has received counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt, foreclosure, and bankruptcy were due, in part, to 
irresponsible financial choices made from 2009 to 2011. However, since 2012, he has 
completed financial counseling and learned to budget his resources. He has settled all 
of his past-due accounts. He is current on all of his revolving credit accounts. He has a 
significant monthly surplus. Applicant has demonstrated that his financial problems are 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by his colleague and performs well at work. No new delinquencies have been 
incurred. He has sufficient income to satisfy his monthly obligations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
