 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-01150 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position on October 10, 2013. 
On April 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 9, 2014, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on November 3, 2014. On November 17, 2014, a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
 
 2
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. She received the FORM on December 10, 2014, and did not respond. The 
case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old customer relations clerk employed by a federal 
contractor since October 2013. She has never held a security clearance or eligibility for 
a public trust position. 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1997, and she received an 
associate’s degree from a community college in May 2002. She worked for a law firm as 
a legal assistant from January 2003 to March 2005, when she was terminated for 
unsatisfactory performance. She was unemployed from March to November 2005. She 
worked as a legal secretary and legal assistant from November 2005 to January 2009, 
when she was terminated. In her application for a public trust position, she stated that 
she did not know why she was terminated and that it occurred while she was on sick 
leave. She was unemployed from January to November 2009. She worked as a quality 
control analyst for a banking institution from November 2009 to April 2013, when she 
was laid off. She was unemployed until she began her current position. 
 
 Applicant married in October 2004 and divorced in June 2006. No children were 
born during this marriage. However, she gave birth to a daughter in November 2012, 
who lives with her.1 
 
 Applicant admitted the 25 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, and her 
admissions are corroborated by her October 2013 credit bureau report (CBR). She 
provided no explanations for her delinquent debts in her answer to the SOR. She did 
not respond to the FORM. Eleven of the debts alleged in the SOR are medical debts. 
The other debts include credit card debts, commercial storage fees, cable service, a cell 
phone account, and a delinquent insurance premium. 
 
 Applicant’s November 2014 CBR reflects the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.e, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.u, and 
1.v. It also reflects a charged-off auto loan that corresponds to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
but in a slightly higher amount. The record does not reflect the reason that some of the 
debts in her October 2013 CBR are not reported in her November 2013 CBR. 
 
 There is no evidence in the record that Applicant has sought or received financial 
counseling. There is no evidence of her monthly income, expenses, and monthly 
remainder. There is no evidence that she has contacted any of her creditors, made any 
payments, sought or made payment agreements, or disputed any debts. 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s biographical information is extracted from her application for a public trust position. The 
record also contains additional personal information in the summary of a personal subject interview 
conducted in December 2013. However, I have not considered the personal subject interview summary 
because it does not comply with the authentication requirements of Directive ¶ E3.1.10. 
 
 3
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 4
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her CBR, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not carried her burden of establishing any of the above mitigating 
conditions. Her delinquent debts are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. She has not sought or received 
counseling. She has not disputed any of the debts. The medical debts may have been 
incurred due to conditions largely beyond her control if they were incurred during her 
periods of unemployment, when she had no medical insurance, or during her 
 
 5
pregnancy. However, she volunteered no information in her answer to the SOR and she 
did not respond to the FORM.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has provided virtually no information about her financial situation and 
the circumstances in which her debts were incurred. Because she requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I have had no opportunity to evaluate her 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her financial situation. Accordingly, 
I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 6
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
