KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Department Counsel’s comments in the File of Relevant Material could not reasonably
be construed as having a deleterious effect on Applicant’s procedural rights.  Any error in the
Judge’s finding is harmless.  The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal. 
DOHA has no authority to grant a probationary clearance.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-00474.a1
DATE: 02/05/2015
DATE: February 5, 2015
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00474
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 21, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On November 5, 2014, after considering the record, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant is 40 years old, and has been employed
with a federal contractor since 2009.  The SOR alleges 33 delinquent debts totaling more than
$182,000.  Applicant admits she owes all the debts except for two debts that total about $1,300.  She
claimed to have made partial payment on some of the debts but did not provide any proof.  She
claimed that several of the debts were duplicates, but provided no proof establishing those
assertions.  She disputes the amount owed on another debt but did not provide any proof of what she
believes she owes.  Applicant claimed that a student loan debt was deferred, but did not provide
proof.
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her 2008 divorce, her husband’s failure to pay
their children’s medical bills, and her failed business.  During the life of her business, she failed to
pay sufficient federal employee taxes, and as a result she owes $17,000 to the IRS.  As part of the
business, she obtained a loan that she defaulted on and a company vehicle that was repossessed.  In
2011, Applicant signed a lease for a retail space for another business, but the business never
materialized.  The lessor wanted her to pay the full term of the lease, even though she never moved
into the space.  The account was placed for collection.  Applicant did not provide any explanation,
documentation, or evidence for actions she has taken to resolve her financial problems.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s debts are recent and unpaid.  She
failed to provide sufficient evidence regarding any of the delinquent debts she believed she paid,
disputed, or believed were duplicates.  She did not provide sufficient evidence that she has resolved
any of the delinquent debts.  Future financial problems are likely to recur, and that fact casts doubt
on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  Without more specific information about her
finances during this period, it cannot be concluded that her financial problems were beyond her
control.  Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F. 
Applicant cites as error the Judge’s finding that she has been a federal contractor since 2009.
She states that the correct date is 2001.  The record evidence does not conclusively establish when
Applicant commenced work as a federal contractor, although the record includes employment
listings with defense contractors prior to 2009.  However, even assuming the Judge erred on this
point, a review of the record and the Judge’s decision convinces the Board that the error did not
affect the outcome of the case.  It is therefore harmless.  
Applicant references the Judge’s finding (on page 2 of the Decision) that she did not provide
any proof of what she believes she owes.  Applicant states that she did not provide any proof of
payments, student loan deferment, and other supporting documentation because of another statement
“in [the] findings stating that providing supporting documents, because of the amount of my debt,
would still not prove credit worthiness.” The Board construes Applicant’s assertion as a claim that
the language in quotations dissuaded her from submitting documentation about her debts.  After a
review of the Judge’s decision, the Board concludes that no such language appears in the Judge’s
3
findings, nor is any such language implied.  There is, however, a comment by Department Counsel
in the File of Relevant Material (FORM) which reads, “Applicant has not submitted any
documentation in support of these claims, but even if she were to establish all of her claims, she
would still have admitted to over $150,000 in delinquent debt.”   Assuming this is the language to
which Applicant refers, the Board concludes that the statement from Department Counsel was within
the bounds of fair advocacy and could not reasonably be construed as having a deleterious  effect
upon Applicant’s procedural rights.  Contained within the record are clear and detailed statements
informing Applicant of her right to submit matters of explanation and/or mitigation in response to
the FORM.  Applicant has not established procedural error.   
Applicant asserts that her student loans have been confirmed as deferred, that credit report
duplication errors have been corrected, and that she has retained counsel to aid her in obtaining
credit counseling and completing the bankruptcy process.  These statements contain new evidence,
which the Board cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant requests “reinstatement” of her
clearance based on a probationary period of at least three months, so that she can complete her
bankruptcy.  Applicant requests relief that is not authorized under the Directive and cannot be
granted by the Board.  See ISCR Case No. 02-11419 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 27, 2003).  
 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
