 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03638 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct, and Guideline D, Sexual Behavior. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline D, sexual behavior. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2014. The Government requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge on November 21, 2014. The case was assigned 
to me on January 3, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
 
2 
 
 
a notice of hearing on January 21, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
February 9, 2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions were incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He completed one semester of college and has taken 
some online college courses. His marriage from 2002 to 2004 ended in divorce. He 
remarried in 2004 and was divorced in 2014. He has three children ages 21, 7, and 5.1 
 
 Applicant was employed as a police officer from 2003 until 2013, when he was 
terminated. Between 2009 and 2010, over a six-month period, Applicant engaged in 
sexual intercourse on four separate occasions with three prostitutes. He had sexual 
intercourse with one of the women twice. Three of the sexual encounters took place 
while he was on-duty, in his police uniform, and working the graveyard shift. One 
encounter took place while he was off-duty. He initiated the contact with known 
prostitutes who lived in his patrol area. The on-duty sexual contact occurred in a park. 
The off-duty sexual contact occurred in a hotel. Applicant paid the prostitutes. He knew 
his actions were wrong.2  
 
 Applicant explained he was going through marital problems when he engaged in 
sexual activities with prostitutes. He explained he participated in these acts to release 
tension, and he was looking for companionship. He was not thinking about the possible 
consequences of his actions at the time. An internal investigation was conducted by the 
police department. Applicant was confronted with the allegations and admitted his 
conduct.3  
 
 Applicant stated he told his federal employer of his termination from the police 
department before he was hired. He worked in Afghanistan from April 2013 until July 
2013, and returned when a background investigation resulted in the withdrawal of his 
interim security clearance. He is remorseful for his behavior.4 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 24-25; GE 2. 
 
2 Tr. 20-24; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. 21-22, 26; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. 24-27; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
As a police officer, Applicant knowingly initiated contact and engaged in sexual 
intercourse with prostitutes on four separate occasions in 2009 and 2010. Three of the 
occasions occurred while he was on-duty and in uniform. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
Applicant engaged in criminal conduct while he was a police officer both on-duty 
in uniform and off-duty. He was aware that his conduct was illegal. He abandoned his 
position of trust as a law enforcement officer. His conduct is serious and casts doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. His 
explanation that he was going through a difficult time in his marriage suggests that he 
does not understand the gravity of his misconduct. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. There is 
no evidence that he continued to engage prostitutes after the six-month period from 
2009 to 2010. There is no evidence he sought counseling to change his behavior or 
took other positive steps to relieve the stressors or reduce the vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(f) and 17(e) do not apply. Although it is 
unlikely that he still associates with prostitutes, his willful participation in wrongful 
conduct raises questions about his willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern for sexual behavior;  
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.  
 
AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant engaged in sexual intercourse with prostitutes while serving as a police 
officer, both in uniform on-duty, and while off-duty. He was in a park for three of the 
sexual encounters. His conduct was criminal. His conduct, as a trusted law enforcement 
officer, reflects lack of judgment and makes him vulnerable to exploitation and coercion. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from sexual behavior. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 14: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature;  
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
Applicant’s inappropriate conduct with prostitutes while serving as a police officer 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s 
position of trust as a law enforcement officer and his inappropriate actions raise 
questions about his judgment that are not mitigated by the passage of time. He was a 
mature man when the behavior occurred, who swore to uphold the law, not break it. His 
explanation that he was having marital problems as a justification for his conduct raises 
lack of judgment concerns. His misconduct occurred in a park and in uniform. This was 
not a private discreet place. I am unable to conclude any of the above mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old. He began serving as a police officer in 2003. Between 
2009 and 2010, while going through marital problems, he engaged in sexual intercourse 
on four separate occasions with three prostitutes. Police officers are held to a high 
standard regarding their personal conduct because they hold a special trust in society. 
Holding a security clearance requires a person to be held to an equally high standard to 
protect our nation’s secrets. Applicant abandoned his positon of trust as a police officer 
and engaged in conduct he was specifically entrusted to prevent. Although he is 
remorseful for his actions and characterizes them as mistakes, there is insufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by his behavior. The record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the personal conduct and sexual behavior guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
