KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board does not agree with Applicant’s interpretation of the Judge’s comments
regarding Applicant’s wife and their checking account.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02791.a1
DATE: 02/13/2015
DATE: February 13, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02791
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
16, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
2
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On December 9, 2014, after the hearing,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the decision.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his current employer, a Defense contractor, since 2003.  He retired
from the U.S. military and is currently attending college.  Applicant divorced his first wife, marrying
his current one later the same year.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges several delinquent debts.  The Judge found five against Applicant.
Some of the debts found against Applicant had been reduced to judgment. The debts were based
upon voluntary repossession of a vehicle, a loan for the construction of a swimming pool, medical
bills, and bills for telecommunication services.  Concerning one of the telecom debts, Applicant
stated that he is negotiating a payment plan.  However, he later stated that he was unaware of the
debt.  
Applicant contends that he is committed to resolving his delinquent debts.  He stated that he
had been unaware of the extent of his financial difficulties because both his previous wife and his
current one handle the finances.  The Judge noted that Applicant still has a joint checking account
with his wife.  Applicant finds the task of getting control over his finances to be “overwhelming,”
admitting that he did not “have it fully grasped as of yet.”  Decision at 5.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved a majority of Applicant’s SOR debts in his favor.  However, regarding
the remaining five, he concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated mitigation.  He noted
evidence that Applicant still shared a checking account with his wife and that he was overwhelmed
by the task of getting his finances in order.  The Judge also stated that there was little evidence to
show that Applicant had acted reasonably in regard to his debts and that his financial problems are
ongoing.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted evidence of Applicant’s military service and
stable work history.  However, he stated that Applicant “still has far to go” in resolving his
difficulties.  The Judge noted that Applicant had not corroborated his claims about debt repayment.
Id. at 9. 
Discussion
3
Applicant has submitted evidence about debt resolution that was not included in the record
and, indeed, which post dates the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant cites to record evidence about his efforts at debt resolution.  His
arguments are not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01669 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 29, 2015).  Applicant disagrees
with what he views as the Judge’s recommendation that he drop his wife from the checking account.
We note that the Judge never made that explicit recommendation, but he did note that Applicant’s
wife remains on the account.  Insofar as Applicant had identified his wife’s stewardship of the
family finances as a contributing factor to their problems, it was not an error for the Judge to
comment on it in his Analysis.  We do not read the Decision as meaning that the Judge denied
Applicant a clearance because his wife’s name is still on the checking account.  He appears to have
denied the clearance because Applicant has shown no success in addressing his delinquent debts or
their root causes.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett           
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
4
Member, Appeal Board
