                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  14-02896          
                                                            )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On August 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
2
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 24, 2014, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 15, 2014, and was scheduled for
hearing on January 7, 2015.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of three
exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B).
The transcript (Tr.) was received on January 16, 2015. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payment of the
debt covered by subparagraph 1.b, endorsements, and sale of the property covered by
the allegations in subparagraph 1.d. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven
days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded seven days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a one-page
email confirming he had reached a payment agreement with creditor 1.b and payment of
the debt owed to creditor 1.b. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were admitted as AEs
C-D.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated one adverse judgment for
$297 and three delinquent debts. The debts exceeded $47,000.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the debts (creditors 1.c and
1.d) and denied the remaining ones. He claimed he paid the debts covered by
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. and disputed the amount of the debts covered by
subparagraph 1.c. And he claimed the debt covered by subparagraph 1.d represented a
deficiency following the creditor’s repossession of the underlying property. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old production supervisor of a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first wife in August 1985 and divorced her in December 1992.
(GE 1) He has one adult daughter from this marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 21) He remarried in
December 1993 and has two adult stepchildren from this marriage. (GE 1 and 3: Tr. 22)
He claimed no post-high school education credits and retained his old job on a part-time
basis after he joined his current employer in 2008. (GE 1; Tr. 24-25)
3
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in March 1983. (GE 1) He received an
honorable discharge in February 1987 after serving four years of active duty. (Tr. 20)
Applicant reenlisted in the Marine Corps in March 1987 and served 18 months before
receiving a general discharge in August 1988 for cited financial irresponsibility (i.e., debt
collectors calling his command). (GE 1; Tr. 21)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated four delinquent debts between 2007 and 2009. (GEs 2-3)
In May 2007, Applicant received medical treatment without medical insurance to cover
the costs of treatment. (GEs 2-3) When he failed to pay the medical bill, the provider‘s
collection agent (creditor 1.a) filed suit and obtained a judgment for $297 in March 2013.
(GEs 1-2) He has since satisfied this judgment. (AE A; Tr. 30-31) Applicant accumulated
another medical debt (creditor 1.b) in October 2008 in the amount of $37. (GEs 1-2) He
has since repaid this debt as well. (AEs A and D; Tr. 32-33)   
In February 2008, Applicant purchased a washer and drier from creditor 1.c for
about $1,000. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 35-36) After purchasing the appliances, he made regular
monthly payments for a number of months. During a brief period of unemployment in
2008 (Tr. 30-31), Applicant ceased making his monthly payments and subsequently
forgot the debt altogether. (GE 3; Tr. 25) Initially, he disputed this debt, claiming it was
barred by the state’s statute of limitations. (GE 3) Since his hearing, he has explored
settlement arrangements with this creditor and claims to have reached a payment
agreement with the creditor that would permit him to make monthly payments. (AE D) To
date, though, he has not documented any agreed payment arrangements with the
creditor or provided any good-faith payments to the creditor. (Tr. 35-37)
In January 1998, Applicant purchased a mobile home for $80,000 and financed his
purchase with a mortgage with creditor 1.d. (GE 3; Tr. 39) Following his relocation to
another state in August 2008 to assist his mother-in-law, he ceased making payments.
(GEs 2-3) In early 2009, he made arrangements with the lender to complete a voluntary
repossession of the home. Following the public sale of the home for $20,000, the creditor
claimed a deficiency of $47,053.  (GEs 2-3; Tr. 39-40) When Applicant could not pay the
deficiency balance with his limited income, the lender assigned the debt to a collection
agency. The debt has remained outstanding since early 2009. 
Applicant has disputed the creditor 1.d debt on both fairness and statute of
limitations grounds and noted the deletion of the debt on his updated credit report. (GEs
1-3 and AE B; Tr. 40-41) Applicant believes that the repossessing creditor has since sold
the property for twice what Applicant owed on the debt and incurred no net loss on its
original loan and debt financing. (Tr. 47-48) Afforded an opportunity to supplement the
record with clarifying information about the creditor’s handling of the public sale, Applicant
did not provide any additional information about the sale. Nor did he provide any
explanations as why he made no prior attempts to negotiate a fair settlement of the
reported deficiency. Because typical supply and demand conditions are lacking in a public
4
sale of a repossessed property, closing bids could not reasonably be expected to produce
sales revenue that match what could be expected in a market-based sale.
Applicant grosses about $76,000 a year from his employment and nets about
$3,400 a month after taxes. (Tr. 42-43) His wife supplements his  income with her part-
time employment and nets about $1,000 a month net of taxes. (Tr. 42-43) Also, his
stepdaughter and her boyfriend who reside with him contribute $550 a month. (Tr. 29)
After allowances for monthly expenses, Applicant has a net monthly remainder of  about
$500 a month. (Tr. 43-44)  He is current with all of his remaining debts. (AE B; Tr. 43-45,
52-53) He expects to receive a promotion that will increase his annual gross earnings by
more than  $8,000. (Tr.  53)  
Applicant and his wife purchased a home in July 2014 with a $3,500 down
payment he received from an automobile  settlement he completed in February 2013. (Tr.
46) And he owns three used vehicles. (Tr. 28) Since pulling his credit report in 2013 to
complete his security clearance application, Applicant has paid off other debts not listed in
the SOR, mostly medical bills. (Tr. 34)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
5
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
6
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts. His
listed debts entail an entered adverse judgment, two delinquent debts: one medical-
related and consumer-related. Applicant’s actions invite the application of the financial
considerations guideline.
Financial concerns
Applicant’s accrued debts are attributable to lapses in judgment in the
management of his financial affairs. His debt delinquencies warrant the application of
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s lapses in judgment in administering his finances were not
accompanied by any manifest extenuating circumstances. His only break in
employment occurred in 2008 and was relatively brief. This brief period of
unemployment is insufficient to afford him any more than partial benefit of MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”
To date, Applicant has made little visible progress in addressing his debt
delinquencies. Only two of his listed debts have been satisfied: his creditor 1.a judgment
and his creditor 1.b medical debt. His efforts to complete a repayment plan with creditor
1.c, while encouraging, are not complete. And he continues to decline to address his
creditor 1.d mortgage debt on grounds of perceived creditor misconduct and statute of
limitations application. Under these circumstances, Applicant’s modest repayment
efforts to date entitle him to no more than partial application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.”
7
To be sure, Applicant seriously disputes his creditor 1.d debt on both fairness
and statute of limitations grounds. Regardless of whether this debt is an otherwise valid
debt, it may no longer be enforceable under the State’s applicable statute of limitations
for written contracts. Account activity covering Applicant’s creditor 1.d debt was last
reported by credit reporting agencies in 2008.
The state statute of limitations in Applicant’s state for claims based on a
mortgage-backed promissory note is five years. See § 1-52.1 of NC Rev. Stats.
Applicant’s listed mortgage deficiency creditor 1.d appears to be covered by the State’s
statute of limitations, and is treated, as such, as a debt that is limitations barred.  
While potentially applicable statutes of limitation have not been recognized by our
Appeal Board to mitigate security risks associated with unresolved delinquent debts,
statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation. Still, they have
never been equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,  ISCR
Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6
(App. Bd. June 2001). 
Weight, if any, to be assigned to potentially applicable statutes of limitations
under the financial consideration guideline should be considered in light of all the
circumstances surrounding the applicant’s historical track record and must take account
of his entire history of demonstrated trust and responsibility. In Applicant’s case, his
financial history cannot completely discount the financial difficulties he experienced
during his military service attributable to his 1988 general discharge. Although the
financial circumstances that contributed to his general discharge are quite old, they do
reflect a part of Applicant’s financial track record and are entitled to some weight to be
taken into account in assessing the amount of mitigation weight to be accorded the
application of the state’s statute of limitations to Applicant’s circumstances. Viewed in
this whole-track record perspective, the controlling state statute of limitations for
secured loan transactions cannot be accorded significant mitigation weight in evaluating
Applicant’s overall financial risk with respect to the specifically covered creditor 1.d debt.
 
Based on Applicant’s afforded reliance on his State’s four-year statute of
limitation to avert enforcement risk with respect to his limitation-barred creditor 1.d debt,
full mitigation credit is not available to Applicant. By virtue of the age and non-
enforcement status of the debts, MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” has only limited
applicability to the limitation-barred creditor 1.d debt.  
Applicant’s limited repayment efforts, and failure to attempt any negotiated
reduction of creditor 1.d’s deficiency claim in light of Applicant’s assessment of the
market conditions surrounding the sale, do not reflect satisfactory progress in
accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an
applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
8
considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2009). Applicant’s modest repayment actions are not enough to enable him to meet the
Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing his finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482
(App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12,
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant documents some repayment
progress, but not enough to facilitate safe predictions about his ability to manage his
finances in the future. He has not completed repayment plans with his remaining two
creditors (i.e., creditors 1.c and 1.d), and has failed to demonstrate any payment track
record that meets minimum Appeal Board criteria. He provided no evidence of civic or
community contributions and only limited evidence of repayment with his payoffs of his
two small creditors (i.e., creditors 1.a and 1.b)  Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to
date are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing
his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:                        For Applicant
Subparas. 1.c-1.dl:                 Against Applicant
                 C  o  n   clusions         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
10
