 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01121 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to file his federal and state tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012. 
He failed to show sufficient progress getting his six tax returns filed. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 11, 2013, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 6) On May 6, 2014, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
as revised by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 2006, 
which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On May 6, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and on June 30, 
2014, he sent an email waiving his right to a hearing. (Items 4, 5) A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 3, 2014, was provided to him on 
October 21, 2014.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to 
me on February 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted that he failed to file his federal and 
state tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012. (Item 4; SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) Applicant also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 56 years old, and he has been working in construction since 2004. 
(Item 6) He has not attended school in the past 10 years. (Item 6) He has never served 
in the military.  (Item 6) He has held a top secret clearance for at least 10 years, and 
there are no allegations of security violations. (SOR response) He married his spouse in 
1984. (Item 6) His children were born in 1981 and 1985. (Item 6) Applicant does not 
have any reportable criminal offenses or alcohol or drug abuse. (Item 6)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant disclosed on his July 11, 2013 SF 86 that he had not filed his federal 
and state income tax returns from 2009 to 2012. (Item 6 at 31-33). He explained that he 
“moved, misplaced paperwork;” he was working on his taxes; and the “government will 
owe me money.” Id.  
 
In response to questions from an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator on August 9, 2013, about his failure to file his 2009 to 2012 federal and 
state tax returns, Applicant provided the same explanation as on his SF 86. (Item 7)  
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant said had filed his 2009 federal and state tax 
returns; however, he did not file his tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012. He explained 
as follows: 
 
My taxes got messed up when I had to move into my investment property, 
and try to rent my home, during the move, my paperwork got mixed up. 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated October 8, 2014, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated October 21, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
My main focus was trying to survive the mess I was in. [P]aperwork got to 
be the last concern, when I did get back to my taxes, they were messed 
up even more, with grand kids running around the house, and trying to pay 
off my debt, the taxes again went to the bottom of the list. I don’t worry 
about it too much, because I knew that I would be getting a refund, and I 
would not owe any money. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant said his finances were “tight,” and he indicated he had been “over $100,000 
upside down” on both of his houses because of the downturn in real estate prices. 
Nevertheless, he worked hard to insure his creditors were paid. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
   
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides one disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(g) provides: “failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required . . . .” Applicant admitted that he 
failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012. The 
Government established the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(g), requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). In regard to federal and state 
income taxes, the Appeal Board has commented: 
 
A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
persons granted access to classified information. Indeed, the Board has 
previously noted that a person who has a history of not fulfilling their legal 
obligation to file income tax returns may be said not to have demonstrated 
the high degree of judgment and reliability required for access to classified 
information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0608 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 
2000). 
 
ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014).  
 
Applicant’s conduct in failing to file his state and federal tax returns for tax years 
2010 to 2012 does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions. He did not 
provide sufficient information to establish his inability to file these tax returns. The 
downturn in real estate damaged his family finances and is a circumstance largely 
beyond his control; however, he did not act responsibly under the circumstances in 
regard to failing to file his state and federal tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
because he did not explain how the real estate downturn caused him not to file these six 
tax returns. He said he would not owe any additional taxes when he files his tax returns.  
 
Applicant did not provide any documents showing how he was collecting or 
replacing the documents he lost or correspondence to or from the Internal Revenue 
Service and state tax authority to establish maintenance of contact with the tax 
authorities; or other evidence of progress or resolution of his tax issues for 2010 to 
2012. In his July 11, 2013 SF 86, he admitted he did not file his 2009 to 2012 tax 
returns and said he was working on his taxes. In his SOR response, he said he filed his 
2009 tax returns. His failure to prove that he has made significant steps to file his state 
and federal tax returns for tax years 2010 to 2012 indicates lack of judgment and 
responsibility. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make greater 
progress filing these six tax returns; and his problem is being resolved, is under control, 
and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish 
mitigation of financial consideration concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is 56 years old, and he has been working in construction since 2004. He has held a top 
secret clearance for at least 10 years, and there are no allegations of security violations. 
Applicant does not have any reportable criminal offenses or alcohol or drug abuse.  
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has acknowledged that he failed to file his state and federal tax 
returns for tax years 2010 to 2012. He has not provided sufficient evidence of what he 
has done to file the six tax returns. His failure to provide more information about his 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
efforts to file his tax returns shows lack of responsibility and judgment and raises 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18.   
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. At some future time, he may well 
be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his worthiness to hold a security 
clearance. Based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am 
required to apply, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or reinstate Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
