 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00012   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant owes approximately $12,916 in unresolved 
delinquent debt, including an outstanding state tax lien. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on May 7, 2014. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 25, 2014, and was given 30 days to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate SOR allegations. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM by the June 24, 2014 deadline, nor did he object to the 
attachments,2 which are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The case 
was assigned to me on December 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, has worked as an engineer for a federal contractor since 
approximately April 2005. He has held a security clearance since at least 1998. On his 
most recent security clearance application dated October 2012, Applicant disclosed 
some derogatory financial information regarding delinquent medical bills and a car loan. 
The ensuring investigation revealed and the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to 
22 creditors for approximately $12,916, including a 2008 state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a, 
$1,325).3  
 
 Applicant claims that his financial problems began after his wife lost her job and 
Applicant was responsible for supporting a family of seven (two adults and five children) 
on one income. From the credit reports in the record, the accounts alleged in the SOR 
became delinquent between 2007 and 2012. Applicant offers as a secondary reason for 
his financial problems, that his wife mismanaged the family finances, which also 
resulted in delinquent accounts. In response to this problem, Applicant states that he 
has taken control over the family finances.4  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits responsibility for 20 of the 22 alleged 
accounts, claiming that the debts alleged in SOR paragraphs 1.j ($828) and 1.v ($201) 
have been paid. He also stated that he is making payment arrangements for the 
remaining 20 debts. The credit reports in the record confirm that Applicant has paid the 
collection account alleged in SOR paragraph 1.v. However, there is no evidence to 
corroborate the resolution of the debt alleged in SOR paragraph 1.j. or payment plans 
for any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. Although Applicant sent letters to each 
creditor proposing a payment plan, there is no evidence showing that any payments 
have made toward the resolution of his delinquent accounts.5  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Appellate Exhibit (AP EX) I. 
 
3 GE 5. 
 
4 GE 4-5.  
 
5 GE 4-7.  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”6 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.7 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,8 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
                                                          
6 AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
8 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
 
4 
 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.9  
 
  The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $12,900 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.10 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.11 Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate the financial 
concerns in the SOR. Even if Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his wife’s 
unemployment, an event beyond his control, Applicant did not provide enough 
information to support a finding that he has acted responsibly to resolve his financial 
issues. He did not specify when his wife lost her job, the length of her unemployment, or 
the resulting decrease in household income. Applicant also failed to show what steps, if 
any, he has taken to resolve his delinquent debt. The payment of one SOR debt (¶ 1.v) 
and Applicant’s letters to his creditors does not connote a good-faith effort to repay his 
delinquent debt.12 Finding no evidence to the contrary, I find that Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and that his finances are not under control. As such, Applicant’s 
unresolved delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to meet his burdens 
of production and persuasion. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant 
chose to rely on the written record. In doing so, however, he failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial concerns. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence showing the resolution of his delinquent 
debt or any evidence to show financial reform or rehabilitation. The security concerns 
raised in the SOR remain. Following Egan13 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989). 
  
10 GE 5-8. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
12 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present documentation 
to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue).          
 
13 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.v:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
