1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-02140
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances beyond her control and
are not indicative of her judgment and reliability. Although she still struggles to resolve
her past debts, Applicant has not incurred any new liabilities, she has paid those debts
that are within her means to pay, and she has successfully disputed several debts listed
on her credit reports. Her current finances allow her to meet her current obligations and
do not present a security concern. Her request for eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 17, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information
required for her work as a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 A list of the Government’s exhibits is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.3
 The original SOR alleged 15 unpaid debts, but erroneously presented them under Guideline E (Personal4
Conduct). Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to change the security guideline at issue from
Guideline E to Guideline F (Financial Considerations). I granted the motion, which is included as Hx. 2. (Tr.
10 - 12)
2
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to hold a
security clearance.  On July 11, 2014, DOD adjudicators issued to Applicant a1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed
under the adjudicative guidelines  for financial considerations (Guideline F). 2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision
without a hearing. On August 25, 2014, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) timely requested a hearing. The case was assigned to
an administrative judge, who scheduled a hearing for October 23, 2014; however,
Applicant was granted a continuance on October 16, 2014.
The case was transferred to me on November 18, 2014, and I convened a
hearing on December 17, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits
(Gx.) 1 - 3.  Applicant testified and proffered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B, and I3
held the record open after the hearing to receive from Applicant additional relevant
information. The record closed on December 22, 2014, when I received Ax. C - E. All
exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on
January 2, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F,  the Government alleged that Applicant owes $25,948 for 154
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.o). Applicant admitted, with explanations,
SOR 1.a - 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i - 1.m. She denied, with explanations, SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.h,
1.n and 1.o. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is 40 years old and is employed as materials planner at a defense
contractor, where she has worked since November 2013. Applicant earned a bachelor’s
degree in 1997, and she worked in sales and customer service jobs. Beginning in 2007,
Applicant was laid off and rehired at least three times. Until she was hired for her
current job, Applicant was either unemployed or significantly underemployed. In her
current position, Applicant has established an excellent reputation for superior
performance, professionalism, and integrity. Her superiors have praised her for being
 See Directive. 6.3.5
3
dedicated to her work and motivated to perform at a high level. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3;
Ax. D; Ax. E; Tr. 9 - 13, 51 - 54)
Applicant has been married twice. Her first marriage began in 1997 and ended by
divorce in 2000. Applicant and her current husband have been married since December
2007. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 45 - 46)
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed most of the debts alleged in
the SOR. Credit reports obtained by the Government further documented all of the
debts alleged. However, Applicant has challenged the validity of the debts at SOR 1.d,
1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.l. Also, the creditor listed in SOR 1.e filed suit to enforce a debt
claimed against Applicant, but she prevailed and the suit was dismissed as without
basis. Applicant is also disputing the debt alleged at SOR 1.c as the result of a
fraudulent automated withdrawal of funds from her bank account. Finally, Applicant has
paid the debts at SOR 1.n and 1.o. (Answer; Gx. 3; Ax. A - C; Tr. 36 - 44, 58 - 65)
During periods of unemployment, Applicant received unemployment benefits, but
was unable to meet all of her obligations. For example, she lost a car to repossession in
2009 after paying her car loan as required for about three years. She believes the
remaining debt after resale of the vehicle is the debt alleged at SOR 1.a, but she has
never been contacted by the creditor for collection and questions the accuracy of the
reported balance due. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 33 - 34, 55 - 58)
Applicant’s current husband is a disabled Navy veteran and receives a monthly
disability payment. However, his ability to contribute to the household income is limited
because most of his money is used to pay for medical co-payments and prescription
medications. As the principle earner in the household, Applicant’s monthly take-home
pay is about $2,200. After paying rent and other regular expenses, she has less than
$200 remaining each month. (Answer; Gx. 3; Tr. 44 - 47, 68 - 71)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
4
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG
¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record clearly
requires an emphasis on Applicant’s inability to pay rather than any suggestion of her
unwillingness to resolve her debts.
I also conclude that the record supports application of the following AG ¶ 20
mitigating conditions:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant paid the debts at SOR 1.n and 1.o. She also successfully disputed the
debts at SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.l. The debt at SOR 1.a is the most significant
remaining debt attributable to her; however, she paid her car loan as required for
several years before defaulting when she was unemployed. She has been unable to
identify the exact amount owed and the creditor does not appear to be pursuing this
five-year-old debt. Much of her financial difficulty arose when she was repeatedly laid off
and was either unemployed or underemployed for six years before obtaining her current
job. Applicant’s current salary and her husband’s medical expenses salary leave her
little with which to resolve her remaining debts, but she has demonstrated a willingness
to resolve those debts within her means to do so.
Applicant’s failure to pay her outstanding debts is not an accurate reflection of
her judgment and reliability, and there is little likelihood she would resort to improper or
illegal conduct to resolve her debts. In addition to evaluating the facts presented, and
having applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed
the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a).
Applicant has been candid about her debts, and she has dealt with her financial
difficulties in a way that reflects positively on her judgment and reliability. The
information about her character and reliability also supports a conclusion that Applicant
is a mature, responsible individual who can be trusted with sensitive information. On
6
balance, she has mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.o: For Applicant
Conclusion
It is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to be eligible for
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
