1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-00436 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position on August 27, 2013. 
On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 31, 2014; answered it on April 17, 2014; 
and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on August 27, 2014. On September 3, 2014, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on September 16, 2014, 
and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015.  
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old trainee employed by a federal contractor administering 
military and veterans’ health care programs. She has worked for her current employer 
since September 2013. She has held 14 jobs since graduating from high school in June 
2002. She worked as a medical records clerk in 2005, a billing representative in 2009 
and 2011-2012, and a bank teller in 2009-2010. From May 2007 to January 2008, she 
worked for a federal agency that required a trustworthiness determination. She left 
federal employment because of a job-related injury. She was unemployed from 
November 2012 to September 2013 because of her pregnancy and childbirth. She also 
was unemployed from August 2009 to August 2010 when she left her job to assist in the 
care of her pregnant half-sister.  
 
 Applicant has never married. She has lived with a cohabitant since February 
2004, and they have a two-year-old son.1 
 
 Applicant’s September 2013 credit bureau report (CBR) reflected 26 delinquent 
debts totaling about $13,100. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted all 26 debts. 
Twenty of the debts alleged in the SOR are medical debts that were referred for 
collection during her last period of unemployment. She has not disputed any of them. 
She explained that she paid any bills that she received, but that her frequent moves 
during the past ten years resulted in past-due bills not reaching her. For each debt, she 
promised to “do everything within [her] financial power” to resolve it. However, she has 
presented no evidence that she has contacted creditors, made payments, disputed any 
debts, offered or negotiated payment agreements, or taken any significant actions to 
resolve her debts. All 26 debts are unresolved.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her application for a public trust position (FORM Item 
5). The record also contained an unauthenticated summary of a personal subject interview conducted in 
September 2013 (FORM Item 7). Applicant did not respond to a request to authenticate the PSI, nor did 
she waive the authentication requirement in the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Thus, I have not considered the PSI 
summary. 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her CBR, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
4 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s debts are 
numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. She has not sought or received counseling. She has not disputed any of the 
debts. The medical debts may have been incurred during her pregnancy or her half-
sister’s pregnancy, making them due to circumstances largely beyond her control, but 
she has not acted reasonably. In spite of her promises in her response to the SOR, she 
has presented no evidence that she has contacted creditors, made payments, 
attempted to negotiate settlements, or taken any other actions to resolve her debts. She 
had an opportunity to present such evidence when she received the FORM, but she did 
not avail herself of that opportunity. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
5 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
have no opportunity to evaluate her credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See 
ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). She has held positions of trust 
in the past. She was employed by a federal agency in a sensitive position, and she was 
responsible for sensitive information when she worked as a bank employee, a medical 
records clerk, and as a billing representative. However, her lack of action to address her 
delinquent debts raises doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her financial situation. Accordingly, 
I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant her eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.z:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
