KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  An ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to
show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  Hearing Office decisions are not binding on
other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  We have no authority to remand a case
simply for the purpose of taking in new evidence.  The Judge examined Applicant’s
circumstances in light of the entirety of the evidence.  Therefore, there is no error in his whole-
person analysis.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-00976.a1
DATE: 02/05/2015
DATE: February 5, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00976
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 29, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline J (Criminal
Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2,
1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 19, 2014, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul
2
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a Defense contractor.  He served in the U.S. military
from 2004 to 2009 and has taken some college courses.
Applicant’s SOR alleges two instances of DUI.  The first occurred in 2008, in which
Applicant was charged with and convicted of having a blood alcohol level of .08% or more while
driving.  He was sentenced to summary probation for three years, attendance at a First Conviction
program, and a fine.  The second occurred in 2011, while he was still undergoing probation for the
first offense.  The court sentenced him to four days confinement, summary probation for five years,
a fine, and attendance at a Second Time alcohol awareness program.  
In 2012, Applicant was charged with and convicted of driving with a suspended license.  He
contended that he was driving because there was no public transportation available to get him to his
job.  Applicant conceded that he also drove in order to visit friends in another city and that he drove
regularly as though his license had not been suspended.  Applicant was required to pay a fine.  In
addition, 90 days were added to his previous suspension. 
Applicant still consumes alcohol.  He drank three or four beers a week or so before the
hearing.  He admitted that he had consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication at least 10 times
since 2011.  He stated that, since 2011, he has not driven a vehicle after consuming alcohol.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his military service, job performance, responsible use
of alcohol, and reliability.  Applicant signed a statement of intent never to abuse alcohol again.
The Judge’s Analysis
In concluding that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his misconduct, the
Judge noted evidence that he had continued to drink to intoxication despite having twice been
convicted of DUI.  He also stated that Applicant’s having driven with a suspended license was a
knowing  violation of the law.  The Judge concluded that none of the mitigating conditions under
any of the Guidelines alleged in the SOR were applicable.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge failed to consider evidence such as his good duty
performance, his military career, and his statement of intent not to abuse alcohol.  The Judge made
findings about the evidence that Applicant has cited.  However, given the Judge’s other findings
3
about the multiple nature of the DUIs and Applicant’s knowing and repeated violation of his driving
suspension, his adverse decision is supportable.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the
Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  To the extent that Applicant is contending that the Judge did not extend the
appropriate weight to the cited evidence, we note that a disagreement with a Judge’s weighing of
the evidence or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to
undermine a Judge’s decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014).
Applicant’s brief cites to some Hearing Office Decisions that he believes support his case for
mitigation.  While we give these cases due consideration, they do not undermine the Judge’s adverse
decision.  Hearing Office Decisions are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal
Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10178 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2013). 
Applicant requests that we either reverse the Decision or remand it to the Judge to take in
additional evidence or to perform a new whole-person analysis.  We have no authority to remand
a case simply for the purpose of taking in new evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-20403 at 4
(Apr. 7, 2003).  For reasons set forth above, we find no cause to set aside the Judge’s whole-person
analysis.  The Judge examined Applicant’s circumstances in light of the entirety of the record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03077 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 13, 2013). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
