1 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                        
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.14-01640 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For the Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Appellant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file, hearing testimony, and the exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant provided adequate information to mitigate the security concerns 
for foreign influence under Guideline B. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) conducted a 
background investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to 
issue a security clearance. On June 19, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2014. He admitted five of the six 
allegations that concerned relatives and friends who are citizens and/or residents of 
Taiwan. He denied SOR allegation 1.f, concerning a Taiwan bank account. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 12, 2014, and the case was assigned 
to me on November 14, 2014. DOD issued a notice of hearing on December 9, 2014, 
received by Applicant on December 15, 2014, scheduling a hearing for January 7, 2015. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 4. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant offered three letters of 
recommendation that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as 
Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through C. I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on January 16, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning Taiwan, and provided U.S. Department of State documents, court decisions, 
reports to Congress, and U.S. Department of Commerce documents concerning 
Taiwan. (GX 3) I will take administrative notice of facts concerning Taiwan as noted in 
my Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and has been a systems engineer for a defense 
contractor since 2013. He was born in the United States when his father was a doctoral 
student at a U.S. university. His mother and father were and are Taiwanese citizens. His 
father had a stroke and his parents returned to Taiwan to receive more affordable 
medical care. Applicant was a young child so he returned to Taiwan with his parents. He 
continued to live with them while he went to school. Applicant received a bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees from a Taiwan University. In 2009 after completing his college 
education in Taiwan, he returned to the United States to continue his education for a 
master’s degree in systems engineering at a United States university. Since Applicant 
was born in the United States, he is a native-born United States citizen. He is single and 
has no children. (Tr. 11-13; GX 1, e-QIP, dated March 1, 2013) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother (SOR 1.a), and father (SOR 1.b), are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan. The SOR alleges that Applicant’s girlfriend (SOR 1.c) 
and his second roommate (SOR 1.d) are citizens of Taiwan. The SOR also alleges that 
Applicant maintains contact with various friends who are citizens and/or residents of 
Taiwan (SOR 1.e), and that he has a bank account in Taiwan valued at $1,000 (SOR 
1.f). Applicant admitted the allegations except for the bank account which has been 
closed. In his response to the SOR, Applicant presented proof that the account was 
closed on July 4, 2014. (Tr. 36; Response to SOR, dated July 17, 2014, attachment) 
3 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a housewife and his father works for the Taiwan lottery 
which is not a government agency. He talks to them using electronic media at least 
once a week for approximately 30 minutes. (Tr. 33-34, 37-38; GX 1, e-QIP, dated March 
1, 2013; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated March 27, 2013) 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend is a citizen of Taiwan, but resides in the United States. 
Applicant and his girlfriend live together and he sees her daily. She is a certified public 
accountant and entered the United States on a work visa. She is applying through her 
employer for permanent resident status. She has no contact with any representatives of 
the Taiwanese Government. (Tr. 33-35, 38-40; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated 
March 27, 2013) 
  
 Applicant and his girlfriend had a roommate that returned to Taiwan as noted 
below. Applicant has a new roommate who assists them in paying the rent. The new 
roommate is a citizen of Taiwan but a resident of the United States. He is a doctoral 
student at a United States university. As a doctoral student, he also works as a research 
assistant at the university. He had previously been a medical researcher at a U.S. 
government health agency. Applicant has known this roommate for over four years. He 
has contact with him also daily. As far as Applicant knows, this roommate has no 
contact with the Taiwanese government. Applicant reported the change in roommates, 
as a change in foreign contact information, to his facility security officer. (Tr. 35-36)  
 
 Applicant admitted in the personal subject interview that he had contacts with 
friends that were citizens/or residents of Taiwan. He stated in the interview that one 
friend is a citizen of Taiwan but resides in the United States. Applicant had weekly 
telephone contact with him. Since the personal subject interview in 2013, the friend 
moved so Applicant no longer has as frequent contact with him. The contact is now 
about four times a year. In the personal subject interview, Applicant noted monthly 
electronic contact with a friend in Taiwan. The contact has been reduced now to about 
once a year. Another friend, who was a friend of his girlfriend and a former roommate, 
has moved back to Taiwan and they are no longer in contact. Applicant listed as a 
foreign contact a friend who is a Taiwanese citizen but resident of Australia. At the time 
of the personal subject interview, he and Applicant were in contact electronically about 
four times a year. They now have electronic contact about once a year. He has another 
friend who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan with whom he has electronic contact on 
social media about four times a year. None of these friends work for any foreign 
government. (Tr. 26-33; GX 2, Personal Subject Interview, dated March 27, 2013)  
 
 A senior principal engineer, who is the manager for the integration and test 
department of Applicant’s employer, testified that he previously served for 12 years in 
the Air Force as a master sergeant (E-7) and is eligible for access to classified 
information. Applicant has worked for him on various jobs in the company for the last 
two years. The witness stated that Applicant is in the top five percent of engineers in the 
company. He is conscientious and meticulous. He performs all tasks on time and in an 
exceptional manner. He became a subject matter expert and has trained other 
engineers. Applicant managed company proprietary information within the prescribed 
4 
 
protocols. He considers Applicant to be loyal to the United States, trustworthy, with 
good judgment, and reliable. He has no concerns with Applicant being granted access 
to classified information. (Tr. 20-25; AX B, Letter, dated January 5, 2015) 
 
 Applicant presented three character references. A coworker wrote that he has 
worked with Applicant on various projects for the last two years. He opined that 
Applicant is very reliable and trustworthy. His attention to detail and his follow through 
make him a valuable employee. Applicant manages company proprietary and 
confidential information without an issue. He trusts Applicant and recommends he be 
granted eligibility for access to classified information. (AX A, Letter, dated December 10, 
2014) A systems engineer manager from Applicant’s employer wrote that he has known 
Applicant for over two years. Applicant has been a trustworthy, intelligent, and 
hardworking employee. The witness has seen how Applicant embraced the culture, 
history, and way of life of the United States. Applicant discussed with him his growing 
up in the United States while his father was in school and how he liked the United 
States. The witness believes Applicant is loyal to the United States and recommends he 
be granted eligibility for access to classified information. (AX C, Letter, dated January 5, 
2015) 
 
 During World War II and after, a civil war was fought on the mainland of China 
between the Chinese Communist Party and the Nationalist Chinese. In 1949, the 
Chinese Communist party was victorious and established a government on the 
mainland. The Nationalist Chinese fled to the island that is now Taiwan and established 
a government. Taiwan has developed steadily since then and is now the world’s 17th 
largest economy. Taiwan became a member of the World Trade organization in 2002, 
further expanding its trade opportunities and further strengthening its standing in the 
global economy. This prosperity established economic and social stability. 
 
 Until 1968, Taiwan’s political system was effectively controlled by one party, the 
Kuomintang. Since ending martial law in 1987, Taiwan has taken dramatic steps to 
improve respect for human rights and created a democratic political system. The United 
States has been committed to maintaining cultural, commercial, and other nonofficial 
relations with Taiwan since January 1979, when it formally recognized the government 
of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as the sole legal government of China. By 
formal act of Congress (Taiwan Relations Act of 1979), the United States is committed 
to provide Taiwan with military defensive arms in support of Taiwan’s security and 
stability in the region. The United States also stated it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan. Despite the United 
States clear and consistent position that Taiwan and the mainland are part of one 
China, the United States expanded commercial ties with Taiwan and is supportive of 
Taiwan’s membership in international organizations, such as the World Trade 
Organization and the Asian Development Bank. (See, United States Department of 
State Background Notes: Taiwan, dated November 3, 2010) 
 
 The Government claims in its request for Administrative Notice that Taiwan 
poses a threat to national security because in the past, it was one of the countries most 
5 
 
actively engaged in industrial espionage and the collection of foreign economic 
information. The request cites to the annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage of 2000. The report lists Taiwan as one of the most 
active collectors of industrial and economic intelligence. However, the Government also 
noted the more recent Annual report from 2008. That report does not list Taiwan as 
being one of the biggest collectors of economic and industrial espionage. It does list the 
PRC and Russia as the most active collectors. The report states the United States is 
targeted by a large number of foreign countries for economic and industrial espionage. 
The report notes that the foreign private sector is the most active collector of this type of 
economic and industrial intelligence, but there is ample evidence that foreign 
intelligence services and other government organizations remain aggressive in 
collecting information by using the private sector to collect information for them and by 
their own continued direct intelligence gathering operations. 
 
 The report lists a number of factors that could cause concern for the United 
States. Among the concerns are the numbers of foreign visitors from any country to 
Untied States sensitive sites, the numbers of non-immigrant persons from a country that 
are admitted as visitors to the United States, and the number of requests from a country 
for visits to military and defense industry sites. There are a large number of visitors from 
Taiwan to the United States for business, pleasure, or other purposes. Taiwan does not 
appear to be any more active in the collection of economic and industrial intelligence 
than many other allied countries. 
 
 The Government noted information concerning individuals in the United States 
convicted of engaging in espionage practices on behalf of Taiwanese companies or 
officials, as well as companies that violated export control requirements in sending 
items to Taiwan. Some of these cases involve individuals in the United States, both 
native born and foreign born and both citizens and non-citizens of the United States, 
that formed friendships with Taiwan intelligence agents and then provided the agents 
with classified information. While the Government presented information only on Taiwan 
cases, it is not difficult to assume that there are cases that pertain to other countries as 
well. The fact that there are cases of Taiwan intelligence agents accepting intelligence 
information from sources in the United States, no matter how obtained, does raise 
security concerns. 
 
 The relationship between the United States and Taiwan is defined in the Taiwan 
Relations Act which recognizes Taiwan. (Public Law 96-8) Taiwan has a long history of 
friendly relations with the United States, including substantial levels of foreign trade. 
Taiwan is an ally and friend but can also pose a security threat because of its activities 
and efforts to obtain economic, industrial, and national security information.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
6 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
7 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States. Even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
the United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government and its relationship with the United States are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the Government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations 
against the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. 
  
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that his mother and father are citizens 
and residents of Taiwan. He admits that his live-in girlfriend and his other roommate are 
citizens of Taiwan and residents of the United States. He admits that he has other 
friends that he is in contact with who are citizens and/or residents of Taiwan. He 
established that he does not have an account in a Taiwanese bank. Applicant’s parents 
and friends who are citizens or residents of Taiwan are a foreign influence security 
concern for Applicant.  
 
 Three disqualifying conditions are relevant to the security concerns raised in the 
SOR under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members or other contacts in a foreign country could not be mitigated unless an 
applicant could establish that the family members or contacts were not in a position to 
be exploited. The Appeal Board consistently applied this mitigating condition narrowly, 
holding that an applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to 
8 
 
make a choice between the interests of the family member and contacts and the 
interests of the United States. Thus, an administrative judge was not permitted to apply 
a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk. Under the new guidelines, 
however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if an applicant 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.   
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) requires substantial evidence of 
a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying 
conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the 
normal risk inherent in having a family member or contacts living under a foreign 
government. The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships must be examined to 
determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. One factor that may heighten the risk in Applicant's 
case is Taiwan’s collection of economic and industrial intelligence and the potential use 
of Taiwanese citizens to obtain such information. The Government has established that 
Applicant may be under a “heightened risk” of security concern because of the 
intelligence activities of the Taiwanese government and Taiwanese businesses to 
obtain industrial and commercial information. An applicant with foreign family or 
friendship ties to a country that presents a heightened risk has a heavy burden of 
persuasion to show that neither he nor the family members and friends are subject to 
influence by that country. The totality of an applicant’s family and friends ties to a 
foreign country as well as the tie to the country for each individual person must be 
considered. There is a risk presented because Applicant’s parents and his friends are 
either citizens or residents or both of Taiwan and Taiwan is a known collector of 
intelligence information from foreigners.  
 
 Applicant raised facts to mitigate the security concerns arising from his parents 
and friends connection to Taiwan. I have considered the following Foreign Influence 
Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
9 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from foreign countries. ;  
 
 In evaluating the potential conflict of interests between Applicant’s parents and 
friends that are citizens and/or residents of Taiwan, I considered that Taiwan is a strong 
ally of the United States with mutual defense and strategic interests. It is a substantial 
trading partner of the United States. A friendly relationship is not determinative, but it 
makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a United States 
citizen through relatives or associates in that country. Even friendly countries may 
engage in espionage against the United States’ economic, scientific, or technical 
interest. Even though Taiwan is not a hostile country and its interests are not inimical to 
the United States, it is reasonable to consider that elements in Taiwan could take an 
action that may jeopardize their friendly position with the United States if they needed 
trade and defense information from sources in the United States. There are strong 
indications that elements in Taiwan could seek economic and sensitive information from 
contacts in the United States.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s relationship with his parents and friends that are 
citizens or residents of Taiwan. I have also considered the Taiwanese Government’s 
significant intelligence and security actions. Taiwan is a known collector of security 
information, but they are not known to coerce their own citizens to gain security 
information. They conduct a significant security apparatus because of the threats from 
mainland China. There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate 
family member in a foreign country are not casual. Factors such as an applicant’s 
relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities to contact them in the past do not 
provide a meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s family circumstances post a 
security concern. Applicant talks to his parents weekly. Thus the communications 
between Applicant and his parents are not casual or infrequent and it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation. Because of Taiwan’s significant intelligence and 
security concerns and functions, it cannot be said that it is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between his parents and the U.S. interests.  
 
 Applicant’s relationship with his girlfriend and roommate are frequent and 
constant, but the girlfriend and roommate reside in the United States and not Taiwan. 
The girlfriend and roommate have no connection to the Taiwanese government and 
their positions and occupations in the United States are not sensitive and not conducive 
for intelligence gathering. Applicant’s relationships with his other Taiwanese friends are 
casual and infrequent. While citizens of Taiwan, they all do not reside in Taiwan. His 
contact with them is very infrequent and casual since it is only by electronic means. AG 
¶ 8 (a) and (c) do not apply to his parents but they do apply to his friends and contacts.  
 
10 
 
 Applicant has strong ties to the United States. He has been a U.S. citizen for his 
entire life. He was only a youngster when he left the United States to return to Taiwan 
with his parents. His parents returned to Taiwan so his father could receive affordable 
medical care rather than because of strong feelings for Taiwan. When he had earned 
his college degrees in Taiwan, Applicant returned to the United States to continue his 
education and work. Another factor to consider is that Applicant returned to the same 
area of the United States where he was born and originally lived. This is an indication 
that he has firm ties to the United States and considers it home. He again embraced the 
culture, history, and life style of the United States. 
 
 Applicant has been open and candid about his foreign contacts. When he 
changed roommates, he notified his facility security officer as required. He also made 
his employer aware of all of his foreign contacts. Applicant’s loyalty to the United States 
is unquestioned. Applicant has established through his actions that it is unlikely that he 
could be placed in a position to choose between any sense of loyalty or obligation to his 
parents in Taiwan and his Taiwanese friends and his sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
United States. In balancing all of the factors mentioned and considered above, I am 
satisfied Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is such that he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest. There is no risk to 
the national interest if Applicant has access to classified information. The mitigating 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 8(b) and (e) apply. 
 
 As noted above, Applicant has no financial interests in Taiwan. He established 
that he closed a bank account in Taiwan. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
 Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his parents in Taiwan and his 
friends who are citizens and/or residents of Taiwan do not cause a security concern. I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
11 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not single items in isolation, to 
reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. I have considered the recommendations of his coworkers and supervisor 
that he be granted access to classified information.  
 
Applicant has frequent and close contact with his parents in Taiwan. He has 
infrequent and causal contact with others who are citizens of Taiwan but residents of 
the United States or other friendly countries. Applicant established that he has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. While access to 
classified information is not based on a finding of loyalty in the United States, Applicant 
has a deep and abiding commitment to the protection of United States interests. 
Applicant is solely a United States citizen and not a citizen of Taiwan. These facts leave 
me without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has met the heavy 
burden of mitigating potential security concerns arising from parents in Taiwan and his 
friends who are citizens and/or residents of Taiwan. Applicant mitigated security 
concerns arising from foreign influence and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
