 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01411 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On June 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (e-QIP, dated January 15, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF adjudicators 
could not make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement notarized June 20, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations, and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.2 A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
prepared by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The FORM was 
provided to Applicant on November 4, 2014, and she was afforded an opportunity, 
within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on 
November 12, 2014. Applicant’s response was due on December 12, 2014, but to date, 
no response was received. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation pertaining to 
drug involvement in the SOR (¶ 1.a.). Applicant’s admissions and other comments are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been an 
employee of the same employer in a variety of geographical locations since 1983, and 
is currently serving as a systems integration business analyst senior staff.3 A May 1980 
high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in management in May 
1994 and a master’s degree in management in December 1999.4 She has never served 
in the U.S. military.5 Applicant was previously granted a secret security clearance that 
expired in 2004.6 Applicant was married in July 1981,7 and she has two children: a son 
born in 1990 and a daughter born in 1991.8 
 
  
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 11; Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 20, 2014), at 1-2. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 9-10; Item 6, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
7
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
8
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 16-17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant is a substance abuser whose choice of substances was marijuana.9 
Her initial use of marijuana occurred in April 2011 in an effort to self-medicate to 
alleviate the pain from a migraine headache. She contends that she has been suffering 
from “debilitating migraine headaches” for the past 20 years, and that she had tried 
every prescription drug available for the treatment of migraine headaches with little or 
no relief.10  Applicant did not submit any medical diagnoses or records to substantiate 
her condition, previous medical treatment, or various prescriptions. She acknowledged 
both “experimenting” with, and “using,” marijuana between six and eight occasions 
when she was in her late 40’s and early 50’s, generally at home in the presence of her 
husband, until July 2013. She said she experimented to self-medicate, and used it “a 
few times as an alternative to alcohol in social situations.”11 The marijuana was eaten in 
cookies and chewable candies, as well as smoked in “joints.”12 The marijuana made 
Applicant feel relaxed and happy, but it failed to alleviate her headache pain.13 
 
The marijuana was furnished to her at no cost by a friend who, in turn, had a 
friend who had legally purchased it using a medical marijuana prescription card in a 
state where such purchases are legal.14 Applicant claims she ceased using marijuana in 
July 2013, and, because she subsequently moved from a state where marijuana use is 
legal to a different state, she no longer associates with her marijuana-supplying 
friends.15 She has no intentions of ever using marijuana again,16 and has indicated a 
willingness to sign a statement saying so.17  
 
Because Applicant did not furnish evidence of her work performance or 
character, either through character references or by performance appraisals (other than 
her self-characterizations of being an extremely ethical person who has received high 
performance ratings),18 it is difficult to assess her work performance or her reputation for 
reliability, trustworthiness, honesty, or good judgment.  
                                                          
9
 Marijuana is classified as a controlled substance under schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970 (21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.).  
 
10
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
11
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 33. 
 
12
 Item 6, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
13
 Item 6, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
14
 Item 6, supra note 3, at 2; Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
15
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
16
 Item 6, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
17
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
18
 See Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
19
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
21
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
22
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”23 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
                                                          
23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
24
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition),” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may 
raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 25(g) may apply where there is “any illegal drug use 
after being granted a security clearance.”  
 
Between April 2011 and at least July 2013, when she was in her late 40’s and 
early 50’s, Applicant consumed marijuana in edible form or smoked it in joints. She 
admitted using marijuana after her security clearance had already expired. Her use of 
marijuana on at least six to eight occasions over that lengthy period was primarily to 
self-medicate, but apparently also for fun and relaxation, for she used it as a substitute 
for alcohol. While there is no evidence of cultivation, processing, purchase, sale, or 
distribution of marijuana, or the possession of drug paraphernalia, by merely using 
marijuana, she illegally possessed it. At some point, despite having been previously 
granted a security clearance (that had already expired), and having been forewarned of 
the Government’s heightened sensitivity regarding marijuana use by federal civil 
servants and federal contractors, Applicant made a decision to use marijuana. While the 
sale of marijuana for medical use in the state may have been legal in that state for the 
person to whom it was sold, it was illegal under federal law. Applicant illegally used 
marijuana prescribed for someone else. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) have been established. 
AG ¶ 25(g) has not been established. 
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is  
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) minimally apply. Applicant’s marijuana abuse occurred 
from April 2011 until at least July 2013. Applicant has never received any medical 
treatment or counseling related to the substance abuse, and she has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for substance abuse or dependence. While Applicant now 
intends to refrain from such use in the future, she did not submit a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. She also noted that 
because she moved to another state, she no longer associates with drug-using 
associates and contacts, and has changed the environment where the marijuana was 
 
7 
                                      
 
used. That position is actually not fully accurate, because Applicant acknowledged she 
used marijuana at home. 
Applicant’s purported abstinence is viewed favorably, and she should be 
encouraged to continue it. However, Applicant has not furnished a reasonable basis for 
ignoring federal and state drug policy, but instead resorted to marijuana use, claiming it 
was merely to self-medicate. Such use may recur if her purported migraine headaches 
should reappear. In the absence of positive character evidence, the uncertainty 
established by her reasons for using marijuana (self-medication versus a substitute for 
alcohol), continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my analysis below.      
 
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept. Applicant 
has worked for the same employer in various locations since 1983. She has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for drug abuse or dependence. Her marijuana experimentation 
and use purportedly ceased in July 2013. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, 
and she should be encouraged to continue it. She claims to have no intention to use 
marijuana in the future. 
 
There is also more substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. There 
are several troubling aspects of this case, including Applicant’s continued use of 
marijuana despite being apprised of the Government’s heightened sensitivity regarding 
marijuana use; her violation of federal law; her use of marijuana over a two-year period 
when she was in her late 40’s and early 50’s; and her wrongfully acquiring the 
marijuana that had been prescribed for someone else.  
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.25 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with some questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude she has failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. (See AG && 
2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. 
Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
25
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
