                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 14-01875
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 9, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(E-QIP) on August 8, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On July 11, 2014, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the
Department of Defense (DoD) could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 24, 2014, and she requested an
administrative hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative
Judge on September 25, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued on October 1, 2014,
and the hearing was scheduled for December 2, 2014.  At the hearing the
Government presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6,
which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented eleven exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through K, which were also admitted into
evidence without objection.  She also testified on her own behalf.  After the record
2
closed, Applicant submitted three Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s
Post-Hearing Exhibits A through C, which were admitted without objection.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on December 10, 2014.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 55 years old and divorced with two children.  She has a Bachelor’s
degree and a Master’s degree in Nursing.  She holds the position of Project Manager
for a defense contractor.  She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection
with this employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on
the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at
risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated August 31,
2013; March 18, 2014; and September 2014, reflect that Applicant is indebted to each
of the creditors set forth in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4, and 5.)  
 
Prior to 2008, Applicant had a good job with her employer in state A, with whom
she worked for three and a half years.  She lived in an affordable upgraded house.
She paid her bills on time and had no financial problems.  In 2008, her employer
offered Applicant a more lucrative job in state B, increasing her income to almost
$200,000 annually.  (Applicant’s Exhibit J.)  To accept the job, Applicant sold her
modest home in state A, and with the profit from the sale, she purchased a big
beautiful fixer-upper in state B.  Applicant asked her employer for an employment
contract, but they refused.  Trusting her employer on their word, and the fact that they
were referring her to a realtor to assist in finding her a new home in state B, Applicant
was comfortable  with taking the job.  In state B, Applicant purchased a home for
$800,000, with monthly payments of $4,500.  Applicant was employed in state B for
about a month before she was asked to resign from the position.  Applicant was told
that she and her new boss, the CEO, had some communication difficulties.  Applicant
was given a six month severance package.  Applicant continued to make the
mortgage payments on the house, and pay her bills as best she could.  To get out
from under the debt, Applicant tried to sell the house, and even short sale the house,
but was unsuccessful.  It was about this time that Applicant’s husband lost his job.
Applicant was unable to find work in the area, so she packed up her car and moved to
state C to take a job.   
3
In 2009, Applicant and her husband consulted a debt management company
for financial counseling, in an attempt to consolidate their delinquent debts and get
them paid off.  They also tried to turn the house in state B over to the lender by way of
deed in lieu of foreclosure, but it was not approved.  (Tr. p. 76, and Applicant’s Exhibit
H.)  
In March 2013, Applicant’s husband filed for divorce.  The following month,
Applicant and her husband separated.  At that time, they quit making payments
through the debt management company.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)  Applicant contacted
their creditors and asked them to continue the lower interest rate and eliminate the
late fees because of the pending divorce, which the creditors agreed to do.
Applicant’s divorce was final in April 2014.  Applicant had the largest income in the
household, and the court assigned her $40,000 of the marriage debt.  Her husband
was assigned only $10,000 of the marriage debt.  Since her divorce, she has already
reduced her marriage debt to $20,000.  (Tr. p. 82.)    
The following debts remained outstanding.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor
in the amount of $1,654.  Applicant explained that when she was hired by her current
employer she broke her lease and was required to pay a one month termination
penalty.  Applicant testified that she paid off the debt and it no longer reflects as owing
on her credit report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C, and Tr. p. 53.)
Applicant was indebted to a creditor for a delinquent credit card in the amount
of $6,646.  Applicant testified that the credit card was used for her business-related
expenses.  Although the debt was charged off by the creditor, she has continued to
make payments.  Applicant currently owes about $5,600, and makes payments of $66
monthly and will continue to pay it off.  (Tr. p. 58-59, and Applicant’s Exhibit D.)
Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was at one time 180
days or more past due in the amount of $141,663.  Applicant explained that this was
the mortgage on her house in state B.  The house has been in pre-foreclosure status
for several years, and is listed with a realtor.  The creditor has recently given Applicant
the approval to submit a deed in lieu of foreclosure.  (Tr. p. 61, and Applicant’s Exhibit
E.)      
Applicant was indebted to a creditor for a delinquent credit card account in the
amount of $8,806.  Applicant stated that she used this card for personal expenses,
including COBRA payments and living expenses while she and or her husband were
not employed.  Applicant testified that she is making payments on the debt and has
been for sometime.  Applicant currently owes about $7,900, and her payments are
$100 monthly.  (Tr. p. 81.)
Applicant is indebted to a creditor in the amount of $36,988 for a charged-off
account.  She explained that this is the second line of credit on her house that she is
trying to sell.  In the event that the loan is forgiven by the creditor when the house is
returned, she will pay any tax liability when assessed.  She explained that as she
4
lowers her credit card debt, she increases her payments on other outstanding
accounts.             
Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account placed into collection in the
amount of $237.  She explained that this was for cable equipment left in her house in
state B.  Applicant testified credibly that this debt has been taken care of.  (Tr. p. 87.)
Following the hearing, a letter from the Applicant indicates that her ex-husband
has recently hired an attorney to pursue financial support.  Although Applicant had
tried to avoid it, she has now been forced to file for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy.  Her
hearing is scheduled for January 14, 2015.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)   
Applicant’s supervisor, a Navy commander and flight surgeon, testified on
behalf of the Applicant.  He stated that Applicant has been working for him for the past
14 months.  She has exhibited good character, trustworthiness and responsibility.  He
noted that she has continued to act with dignity, honor, courage, and commitment in
the face of financial and personal adversity that she has been going through.  Her
work is extremely valuable to the Department of Defense medical command.  (Tr. pp.
109-126.)    
Letters of recommendation from numerous professional associates of the
Applicant indicate that she is highly motivated, dedicated and skilled at her job.  She is
highly ethical and trustworthy.  She is highly recommended for a security clearance.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.) 
A letter of recommendation from a retired Army colonel, who is an international
leader in Health Informatics, a registered nurse, and a full professor, and who has
known and worked with the Applicant over the past twenty years, states that in her
opinion Applicant is reliable, trustworthy, responsible, and of the highest integrity.  She
is said to be a dedicated health professional who has always placed the needs of
others above her own and has always shown fiscal responsibility on the Health IT
projects they worked on.  Applicant is highly recommended for a security clearance.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)
A letter from a Senior Vice President of a previous employer states that
Applicant was competent, efficient, timely, and well organized in fulfilling the objectives
of her job requirements.  In fact she consistently demonstrated enthusiasm to exceed
the set objectives.  Applicant is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit C.)     
5
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.
An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
6
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudication process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a
determination.” The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or
conclusions that have reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The
Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based on evidence that is speculative or
conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive
Order 10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or
7
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with her security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that circumstances largely beyond the Applicant’s control
contributed, if not caused, her financial problems.  Applicant accepted a more lucrative
job in state B and relied on her employer when she purchased a home there.  After a
month on the job, she was asked to resign for no fault of her own.  She was left
without income to cover her living expenses.  At the same time, her husband lost his
job.  Without income to pay their bills, they became financially delinquent.  To
complicate matters, in 2013,  Applicant’s husband filed for divorce.  All along,
Applicant has continued to focus on staying employed and resolving her debt.  She
has been in contact with her creditors.  She has paid off some of her debt and is
making payments toward other debt.  She has recently been approved to submit a
deed in lieu of foreclosure concerning the house in state B that she has been unable
to sell for many years.  As circumstances have recently changed, Applicant is now in
the process of filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in order to discharge her remaining
delinquent debts.  
           
Under the circumstances, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve her
debts.  She understands that she must remain fiscally responsible if she is to hold a
security clearance.  She has not incurred any new debt that she cannot afford to pay,
and she has is working to resolve her delinquent debt.  There is clear evidence of
financial rehabilitation.  In the event that she cannot meet her financial obligations, or if
she does not completely resolve her current outstanding debt, her security clearance
will be immediately in jeopardy.  However, at this time, Applicant has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation, or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d)
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
8
    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified
information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented, including the favorable
testimony from the Applicant’s witness.  It mitigates the negative effects of her
financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on her ability to safeguard
classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome
the Government's case opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly,
the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
   FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant
        Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
9
