 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01650  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant’s financial problems were not the result of 
irresponsible or reckless behavior that indicates an inability to properly handle and 
safeguard classified information. He has resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR, 
and his finances are under control. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on May 8, 2014. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate SOR allegations. 
Applicant received the FORM on approximately October 15, 2014, and responded 
timely. The items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and the documents submitted by Applicant are admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I. All exhibits were admitted without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on December 5, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 64, has worked as an engineer for a federal contractor since 2003. On 
his November 2013 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed several 
delinquent debts. The ensuing investigation revealed and the SOR alleged that 
Applicant was indebted to six creditors for approximately $54,600. Based on his Answer 
to the SOR, Department Counsel concedes that Applicant has resolved the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.d-1.f, totaling approximately $9,800. Only the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($4,735) and 1.c ($40,029), respectively related to the mortgage 
on Applicant’s home and a home equity line of credit (HELOC) remained unresolved 
when the Government submitted its FORM.2 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a series of events, personal and 
professional that occurred between 2011 and 2013. Before 2011, Applicant, who 
previously held a security clearance during his 26-year military career and his 10 years 
as a federal contractor, did not have a history of financial problems. Because 
Applicant’s career path, both military and civilian, required significant travel, Applicant’s 
wife managed the family’s finances. In 2011, the contract under which Applicant had 
been working was awarded to a different federal contracting company. The new 
company hired Applicant into the same position, but cut his salary by $24,000. At the 
time, Applicant was supporting both of his adult daughters as they pursued their college 
and graduate-level educations. In order to meet his financial obligations, Applicant took 
a withdrawal from his retirement account, which resulted in a tax penalty. Applicant’s 
wife fell ill with what would be the beginning of a series of medical complications that 
would recur over the next two years. His daughters, both disabled, began experiencing 
their own medical issues that resulted in numerous doctor visits and surgeries.3 
 
In 2012, as Applicant was preparing his 2011 federal income tax returns, he 
learned that he was no longer in remission from a serious medical condition. As he 
focused to concentrate on his health, he neglected to file his federal and state income 
tax returns. His wife continued to experience medical issues that required emergency 
hospitalizations. Also, the family endured the unexpected death of a close relative and 
had to unexpectedly contribute money to the payment of her final expenses. Applicant’s 
wife succumbed to the stress of managing the family’s finances and allowed some of 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3Answer; AE A, C-F.  
 
3 
 
their accounts to become delinquent. She stopped paying the mortgage (SOR ¶1.b) 
HELOC account (SOR ¶ 1.c) in the summer of 2012. The creditor holding the HELOC 
charged off the account in August 2012. 4  
 
When Applicant’s mortgage account became over $8,000 in arrears, the 
mortgage company began to process the property for foreclosure, assessing Applicant 
approximately $4,700 in administrative fees. Unbeknownst to Applicant, his wife agreed 
to a payment plan to rehabilitate the mortgage. Under the terms of the rehabilitation 
agreement, failure to make timely payments could result in the foreclosure of the 
property. While Applicant knew that his wife got behind on some of their bills, he did not 
realize the extent of the problem until August 2013, when his wife was admitted to the 
hospital for an emergency stay. Because she missed the August 2013 rehabilitation 
payment, the mortgage company initiated foreclosure proceedings on their home. Upon 
learning of their financial issues, Applicant assumed control over the family finances.5  
 
Applicant arranged a payment plan with the IRS to resolve his outstanding tax 
liability. He successfully completed the payment plan in July 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He also 
paid the three outstanding medical bills, totaling $88 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f). The mortgage 
company allowed Applicant to continue the mortgage rehabilitation payment plan, which 
he successfully completed in January 2014. Although the mortgage is current, the 
administrative fees assessed in 2012 are being reported as past due; however, the fees 
are not due until the loan is paid in full. Applicant has chosen to pay them off. In 
November 2013, he made a $1,000 down payment toward the fees and has entered 
into a $300-per-month payment plan to address the remaining balance. Applicant has 
also entered into a payment plan with the creditor holding the HELOC. The creditor has 
agreed to accept monthly payments of $550, which is memorialized on Applicant’s 
monthly billing statements. To date, Applicant has paid $2,200 toward the resolution of 
this debt.6  
 
Since August 2013, Applicant and his wife have not missed any payments on 
their recurring financial obligations and have not obtained any new consumer credit 
accounts. Applicant continues to travel for work, but is continuing to take an active role 
in helping his wife with the family finances so that they will not find themselves in similar 
financial troubles again.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
                                                          
4 Answer; GE 6; AE A. 
 
5 Answer, AE A.  
 
6 Answer; AE A, G-H.  
 
7 AE A.  
 
4 
 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to six creditors for approximately 
$54,600. The debts are substantiated by the record.9 Between 2011 and 2013, 
Applicant had a history of not paying his bills.10 However, Applicant has submitted 
sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised by his finances. 
Applicant’s financial issues do not cast doubt on his current security worthiness. This 
brief lapse in financial responsibility was an isolated event in Applicant’s 36-year history 
as a security clearance holder. His financial problems were not caused by irresponsible 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 GE 6. 
 
10 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
 
5 
 
or reckless behavior, but by a “perfect storm” of professional, personal, and medical 
events that demanded Applicant’s attention and caused him to briefly neglect his 
finances. Furthermore, he did not have any reason to doubt his wife’s ability to maintain 
the couple’s finances. Upon learning of the problems, Applicant worked to resolve them 
well before the issuance of the SOR. He has made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts. All of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.11 
His finances are now stable and under control, and it is unlikely that he will experience 
similar financial problems in the future.12 
 
I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. 
In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 
2(a). Applicant’s brief period of financial problems is not indicative of financial 
irresponsibility, poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules 
and regulations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.                                         
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 Answer, AE A, G-H. 
 
12 See  AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (c)-(d).  
