 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02950 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 28, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 5, 2014. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 17, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
28, 2014, with a hearing date of December 4, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered exhibit (GE) 1, which was admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I). 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A-1 through A-11, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2014.  
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning India.1 
Department Counsel provided supporting documents that verify detail and provide 
context for these facts in the Administrative Notice request. See the India section of the 
Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from Department Counsel’s 
submissions on India. Applicant requested that I take administrative notice about certain 
facts related to India.2 Despite Applicant’s objection to the dated nature of the 
government-source documents, I will take notice of facts from both proffered sources.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b though 
1.h, to wit: that his brother is a colonel in the Indian Army and a citizen and resident of 
India; that his sister, other brother, and mother-in-law are all citizens and residents of 
India; and that his father-in-law is a resident of India, but a citizen of the Netherlands; 
that he owns multiple properties in India worth approximately $580,000 and he has a 
bank account in India worth approximately $8,500. He also stated that his mother 
passed away in March 2014, thereby denying SOR ¶ 1.a. Those admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He was born in India in 1961. He has worked for a 
federal contractor as a director since March 2001. According to his security clearance 
                                                          
1 HE II. 
 
2 HE III. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
 
application (See Sections 9 and 14), he came to the United States in October 2000, but 
in his testimony he claims he came to this country when he was 29 years old or in 
approximately 1990. There is no further explanation in the record about this 
discrepancy. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2013. He is married and has 
two children. His wife and children were all naturalized in April 2013.5   
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 2000 to pursue employment. From 2000 
until 2013, he had permanent residency status, based upon his employment, before he 
was granted U.S. citizenship. He is a homeowner whose home equity is approximately 
$600,000. He has other U.S. assets in the form of a retirement account and other funds 
totaling approximately $500,000. Both of his children went to college in this country and 
they are both current residents here. Applicant has been active in several civic 
organizations within his community, including the Navy League, the Rotary Club, and he 
has served as a volunteer for the USO. His annual income is approximately $140,000. 
His wife does not work.6   
 
 Applicant owns property in India valued at approximately $580,000. This is 
investment property for which he receives rental income of $8,000 annually. He 
expressed a desire to sell the Indian property and transfer the proceeds to the United 
States. He has contacted a realtor and an accountant, but no evidence of any sale was 
offered. He also maintains a bank account in India to further his real estate interests 
there that currently carries a balance of $15,000.7 
 
 The status of Applicant’s relatives who are alleged to be residents and citizens of 
India is as follows:  
 
 1. His mother passed away in March 2014.8   
 
 2. His brother and his family. His brother is a colonel in the Indian Army. He is 
assigned at an ordinance position. He has no involvement with the Indian intelligence 
service. Applicant has telephone or text contact with him about every four to six weeks. 
He does not provide them any financial support.9  
 
 3. His sister is a retired college president. He has contact with her every five or 
six weeks. He does not provide her any financial support.10   
                                                          
5 Tr. at 19; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 21, 23, 25, 41-43; GE 1; AE A-2 to A-11. 
 
7 Tr. at 35-40, 45-46; GE 1; AE A-2. 
 
8 Tr. at 21; AE A-2. 
 
9 Tr. at 26-27, 34; GE 1. 
 
10 Tr. at 28, 34; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 4. His older brother works for an import-export business. Applicant last saw this 
brother at his mother’s funeral, but before that he had not seen him in 10 years. He 
does not provide him any financial support.11 
 
 5. His father-in-law and mother-in-law split their time residing in India and 
Holland. His father-in-law is a retired business executive. His mother-in-law is a 
housewife. His wife has weekly contact with her mother. He does not provide them any 
financial support.12 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of a friend who has known him for 12 to 14 
years. The witness is a former police officer. He opined that Applicant was a quality 
person who was trustworthy.13 
 
India 
 
India is a democratic republic with a cooperative relationship with the United 
States. The United States recognizes India as key to strategic U.S. interests, and has 
sought to strengthen its relationship with India. The United States and India have been 
committed to a strategic partnership that has seen expanded cooperation in the areas of 
civilian nuclear activities, civilian space programs, and technology trade. The United 
States is India's largest trading partner and investment partner. India’s new prime 
minister could seek to further U.S. ties to his country by cementing a security 
partnership.   
 
Notwithstanding, differences remain between the two countries, including 
concerns about India’s nuclear weapons program, abuses of human rights (although, 
the Indian government is considered to generally respect the human rights of its 
citizens), and its refusal to sign weapons non-proliferation treaties. Of grave concern is 
India’s cooperation and partnership with Iran and its military forces. Despite 
advancements in the United States-Indian relations, India has been identified by the 
U.S. intelligence community as one of the most active collectors of sensitive U.S. 
economic, industrial, and proprietary information. The United States has sanctioned 
Indian scientists and chemical companies for transferring to Iran weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD)-related equipment and/or technology. Additionally, there are 
numerous documented cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India.14 
  
 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 30, 34; GE 1. 
 
12 Tr. at 31-32, 34. 
 
13 Tr. at 48-51. 
 
14 HE II (References I though XIV), HE III. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, which could subject the individual to heighted risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his two 
brothers, sister, father-in-law, and mother-in-law, who are living in India and because of 
Applicant’s relationship with his brother who is an officer in the Indian Army. AG 7(d) 
applies because of Applicant’s wife’s relationship to her parents. AG ¶ 7(e) applies 
because of his property holdings in India.      
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant communicates with his younger brother on a regular basis. His 
contacts with his older brother and sister are not as frequent. His wife has weekly 
contact with her parents. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not 
attempted to rebut this presumption. Applicant’s relationships with his relatives living in 
India are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His relatives in India create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help those relatives. For example, if the Indian Government wanted to expose Applicant 
to coercion, it could exert pressure on his family and his in-laws. Applicant would then 
be subject to indirect coercion through his relationship with his relatives and classified 
information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in India is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of India with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in India do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in India who might be coerced by 
governmental entities in India.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”15 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from India seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his relatives 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
living in India, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Although 
Applicant’s communications with his relatives, other than his younger brother, living in 
India are infrequent, he continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. 
Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign 
influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has regular contact with his relatives who live in India. His brother has 
a significant government affiliation as a high-ranking officer in the Indian Army. 
Applicant came to the United States in 2000, but did not become a citizen until 2013. 
Although he has made a nice life for himself and his family in this country, the evidence 
does not support that he has sufficient deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties such that he would resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests. Applicant was 
unable to fully meet his burden of showing that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. None of the mitigating conditions are 
 
9 
 
 
applicable to the Applicant’s relationship to his brother who is a colonel in the Indian 
Army, but ¶ 8(a) applies to his sister, older brother, and his in-laws. 
 
Applicant has substantial property and other interests in the United States, which 
include his employment in the United States, and his status in the local community. 
However, he also has substantial financial interests in India. He stated his intention was 
to sell his interests in the Indian property, but he presented no evidence of progress 
toward that end, other than to contact a realtor. These Indian property interests are 
substantial enough to create a conflict of interest such that they could be used to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure the Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply.  
 
In sum, Applicant has not met his burden to show it is unlikely that he will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family members 
and the interests of the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending towards 
denial of Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing towards 
granting of his clearance at this time. Applicant’s brother’s military connection and his 
substantial property interests in India create a potential conflict that he failed to provide 
sufficient mitigating evidence to overcome.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.b:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
