 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01155 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 20, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on October 14, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on October 21, 2014. As of January 29, 2015, he had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on February 3, 2015. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM (Items 4-8) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He is applying for a security clearance for the first time. 
He attended high school for four years, but it is unclear if he graduated. He also 
participated in an apprenticeship program through a union. He is married with a 16-
year-old stepchild.1   
 
 Applicant was arrested in 1998 and charged with possession of marijuana. He 
received a deferred adjudication, and the charge was dismissed in March 2001. He was 
arrested again in July 2001 and charged with possession of marijuana. The charge was 
dismissed in October 2001.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2006 and charged with driving while intoxicated 
(DWI), second offense. In October 2006, he was found guilty and sentenced to 
confinement for 365 days with 355 days suspended, probation for three years, a 
restricted license with an ignition interlock device, a $500 fine, and $221 in court costs.3 
  
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
January 2014. Section 22 asked: 
 
Section 22 Police Record  
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court 
record, or the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad. 
 
Police Record 
 
Have any of the following happened? (If ‘Yes’ you will be asked to provide 
details for each offense that pertains to the actions that are identified 
below.) 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 2, 5-7.  
 
3 Items 2, 8.  
 
 
3 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been issued a summons, 
citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against 
you? (Do not check if all the citations involved traffic infractions 
where the fine was less than $300 and did not include alcohol or 
drugs) 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement 
official? 
 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been charged, convicted, or 
sentenced of a crime in any court? (Include all qualifying charges, 
convictions or sentences in any Federal, state, local, military, or 
non-U.S. court, even if previously listed on this form). 
 In the past seven (7) years have you been or are you currently on 
probation or parole? 
* * * 
 
Police Record (EVER) 
 
Other than those offenses already listed, have you EVER had the 
following happen to you? 
 
* * * 
 
 Have you EVER been charged with an offense related to alcohol or 
drugs?4 (emphasis in original) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to all the police record questions. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86 by answering “No” to the last question (Have 
you EVER been charged with an offense related to alcohol or drugs?). Applicant denied 
intentionally providing false information on his SF 86:  
 
This was a mistake on my part as other sections asked about offenses 
within 7 years and I simply misread the question. Following the initial 
questionnaire, I did meet with an investigator regarding this matter where I 
admitted fault and explained that I made an error on filling out the 
paperwork. While I am not proud of my past indiscretions, I assure you 
that I would never try to hide them or deliberately lie about them. This is a 
simple case of human error on my part in completing the paperwork.5 
 
                                                          
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Item 2.  
 
4 
 
 Since Applicant did not request a hearing, I was unable to observe him and make 
a credibility determination. Applicant stated that he thought the relevant question only 
required him to list drug and alcohol offenses within the last seven years. That is 
contrary to the clear wording of the question. Additionally, Applicant answered one of 
the questions that only went back seven years incorrectly. Applicant was sentenced to 
probation for three years in 2006. He should have answered “Yes” to the question that 
asked: “In the past seven (7) years have you been or are you currently on probation or 
parole?”6 Having considered all the evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified 
the SF 86. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6 Item 4.  
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his criminal record on his 
SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
6 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant may have revealed his criminal history during his background interview. 
However, having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on 
his SF 86, I have also determined that Applicant provided false information when he 
denied the omission was intentional. It would be inconsistent to find the conduct 
mitigated.7  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his criminal record on his 
2014 SF 86. There are concerns about his judgment, honesty, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
