 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03449 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 15, 2014, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether 
his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 10, 2014. He elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 15, 2014, was 
provided to him by letter dated October 17, 2014. Applicant received the FORM 
on October 27, 2014. He was given 30 days to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional 
information, and by separate memorandum dated December 4, 2014, Department 
Counsel did not object to the additional information. The case was assigned to me 
on December 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all seven of the allegations alleged in the SOR under 
Guideline H. After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old case management team leader, who has worked 
for a defense contractor since October 2013. According to his job description, he 
is required to possess a top secret clearance or must be able to obtain a top 
secret clearance. (Item 5; Response to FORM.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2004 He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in history and political science in December 2010. Applicant is 
not married; however, he has resided with a cohabitant since April 2013. He does 
not have any children. Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (Items 5 and 
6.) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The facts of this case are relatively straightforward. The unrebutted 
allegations describe Applicant’s extensive and continued use of illegal drugs 
spanning a 16-year timeframe. His drug use began in 1998 when he “12 or 13 
years old” when he smoked marijuana with his cousin while on summer vacation. 
Over time his drug use increased in variety and amounts to include using 
marijuana with varying frequency from 1998 to March 2014, using prescription 
medication Dexadrine without a prescription on various occasions from August 
2010 to December 2010, using hallucinogenic mushrooms on various occasions 
between 2003 to 2004, using LSD in 2005, using cocaine in 2000, and using 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
hashish on multiple occasions from 2005 to 2009. Applicant also purchased 
marijuana with varying frequency from 1998 to 2014. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g, Items 1, 
4, 5, and 6.) 
 
During Applicant’s Enhanced Subject Interview (ESI) conducted on May 1, 
2014, as part of a single-scope background investigation, he discussed his past 
drug use, among other things, in detail. His father was a long-time marijuana user 
and was on probation for a marijuana violation, and his uncle was in prison for a 
drug-related charge in the 1990s.  During his ESI, Applicant claimed that he was 
uncertain whether his cohabitant, a past marijuana user, was still using marijuana. 
He further claimed that he asked her to stop using marijuana, which resulted in 
arguments between them. (Item 6.) 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use was infrequent until he began college. His 
college marijuana use started out as “once or twice a semester” until it became 
“regular” and remained so until July 2013 when he became unemployed. In 
approximately September 2013 when he started his current job, Applicant claimed 
that he stopped using marijuana altogether and also stopped associating with 
marijuana users. He denies that he has a physical addiction to marijuana. (Item 
6.) After beginning his job in October 2013, he claims his next and last marijuana 
use occurred in March 2014 during his cousin’s funeral memorial. Applicant did 
not inform his employer of this use because he was unsure how to proceed and 
also unsure of his security clearance status.1 (Items 4 and 6.) 
 
Applicant denied receiving drug and alcohol treatment or counseling adding 
that no one suggested that he needed any such treatment or counseling. (Item 6.) 
Applicant asserts that his marijuana use was due to immaturity and not thinking 
about his future or career. In his September 2014 SOR answer, Applicant claims 
that he convinced his cohabitant to stop using marijuana for the “the sake of my 
security clearance.” Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation. (Item 4.) He did not 
provide any evidence of having received a drug and alcohol assessment that 
would have provided corroboration that he is leading a drug-free life. 
 
Applicant’s post-FORM submission consisted of a personal statement and 
various documents submitted separately by his employer. Those company 
documents consist of: (1) a letter dated November 10, 2014, from his Human 
Resources Manager; (2) a signed company Drug Testing Acknowledgement Form 
dated October 21, 2013, acknowledging that he understood his company’s drug-
free policy and that he was subject to drug testing at any time; (3) a signed 
company policy and procedure acknowledgement form dated October 21, 2013; 
                                                          
1
The facts described above were derived from Applicant’s May 2014 ESI. Additional facts 
regarding his drug use history may be found in his ESI. (Item 6.) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(4) a case manager job description review form dated November 13, 2013; (5) a 
case management training completion memo dated April 28, 2014; (6) a personal 
action form promoting Applicant to case management team leader dated August 
11, 2014; (7) a team leader job description; (8) a team leader review form dated 
August 2, 2014; (9) a training completion list for Applicant covering the timeframe 
from December 2013 to October 2014; (10) 2014 security briefing dated October 
27, 2014; (11) random drug test memo dated November 3, 2014; and (12) 
negative drug specimen result certificate dated October 4, 2014. (Response to 
FORM.) 
 
Applicant reiterated in his Response to FORM his commitment to leading a 
drug-free life and that he made significant lifestyle changes supporting a drug-free 
life. He spoke of his progression in the company from trainee to case manager to 
team lead in a relatively short time. (Response to FORM.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s Human Resources Manager compiled a comprehensive 
package described supra supporting Applicant’s favorable security clearance 
adjudication. She discussed her company’s support of maintaining a drug-free 
work place, steps her company had taken to enforce that policy, and Applicant’s 
character and excellent work performance. (Response to FORM.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
                                                  
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two of those drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions are applicable in this case: “(a) any drug abuse,”2 and “(c) 
illegal drug possession or sale or distribution.”3 The Government established its 
case through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
                                                          
2
AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and 
other similar substances. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has 
since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. 
  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining 
when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal 
Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an 
applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the 
hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has 
passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” The record 
evidence is insufficient to make such a determination. 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant’s last drug use was in March 2014 at 
his cousin’s funeral service after he began working for a defense contractor in 
October 2013. He claimed to have stopped using drugs when he began 
employment with his company – a company that offered him upward mobility with 
a bright future. Furthermore, at the time he was hired he was informed of his 
company’s drug-free policy and the consequences of violating that policy. 
However, when faced with what should have been an easy decision, as a 27-
year-old with a lot at stake, he was unable to walk away from the situation. 
   
Applicant claims that he has disassociated from drug-using associates and 
contacts, that he avoids environments where drugs are used, and submitted a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any drug 
violation. Apart from his written assertions and absent corroboration, I am only 
able to give Applicant partial credit under AG ¶ 26(b)(1), (2), and (4). I am unable 
to give Applicant any credit under AG ¶ 26(b)(3) given his intermittent and 
sometimes extensive drug use from 1998 to 2013 and his inability to refrain from 
further drug use as demonstrated by his use of marijuana in March 2014. 
 
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not sustain a severe or 
prolonged illness during which these drugs were prescribed nor produce evidence 
of same. AG ¶ 26(d) is not applicable. Applicant denied receiving drug and alcohol 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
treatment or counseling adding that no one suggested that he needed any such 
treatment or counseling.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s long history of using a variety of illegal drugs and then 
reverting to reported one-time marijuana after being hired by a defense contractor 
leaves me with doubts. He violated the significant trust the Government and his 
employer placed in him. While Applicant is to be commended for his stated intent 
to lead a drug-free life, his conduct and choices leave me with doubts about his 
ability to comply with the behavior expected of those entrusted with a security 
clearance.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My 
comments in the Analysis section are incorporated in the whole-person 
discussion. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for 
his decision to stop using drugs. During the relatively short time Applicant has 
been working in his current position, he has done quite well. From all indicators, 
Applicant has a number of positive qualities. 
   
Nonetheless, security concerns remain after Applicant’s 16-year history of 
drug use and his use of drugs after he was employed by a defense contractor. In 
requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence 
to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the drug involvement security 
concerns. It may have been helpful to have had some additional evidence such as 
a comprehensive drug and alcohol evaluation and evidence corroborating 
Applicant’s claims of his disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts. 
Additionally helpful would been an opportunity to make a credibility assessment of 
Applicant’s testimony rather than rely on the written record. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement. 
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
