 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02126 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.1 The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 9, 2014, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 13, 
2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 22, 2015, and the hearing was 
                                                          
1 The SOR’s caption lists this case as an Industrial Security Clearance case. Department Counsel 
confirmed it is an application for a position of trust. 
 
2 
convened as scheduled on February 9, 2015. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, some with explanations. Her 
admissions were incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2001. She furthered 
her education from 2011 to 2013, earning an associate’s degree in March 2013. She 
has also participated in online education. She married in 2005 and separated from her 
husband in 2012. They have two daughters, ages ten and six.2  
 
 From 2006 to 2013, Applicant worked as a teacher’s assistant for a school 
district. In 2013, she was hired in her current job. She was unemployed from the fall of 
2005 to the spring of 2006.3  
 
 Applicant admitted the 19 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling more than 
$31,000. The delinquent debts were verified through her credit report.4 The debt in SOR 
¶ 1.a ($2,159) is a judgment. The debt was for the purchase of pots and pans. Applicant 
testified that this judgment was included in her husband’s bankruptcy and was 
discharged. It appears the judgment was entered against both her and her husband in 
2008, and her husband filed for bankruptcy in 2009. She testified she disputed this debt 
by telephone with the credit bureau. The debt is unresolved.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($16,563) is a private student loan account opened by 
Applicant in June 2011. She received her associate’s degree from an institution in 
March 2013. She did not make any payments toward the loan. After receiving the SOR, 
she stated she contacted the financial office of the institution to work on resolving the 
debt. It is unresolved.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($563) appears to be a government unsecured 
guaranteed loan and the amount alleged is past due. The balance of the loan is 
$12,103. The repayment terms for the loan are $188 payments for 147 months. 
Applicant stated she is unfamiliar with this debt, and she telephonically contacted the 
                                                          
2 Tr. 23-25, 33. 
 
3 Tr. 25. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 17-19, 31-32, 54-56; Answer to SOR. A debt discharged in Applicant’s husband’s bankruptcy does 
not affect her obligation to pay the debt.  
 
6 Tr. 32-35. 
 
3 
credit bureau to dispute the debt. She did not contact the creditor. She did not provide 
documents to support her actions. It is unresolved.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($3,089) is a car loan for a vehicle Applicant purchased in 
approximately 2004 or 2005. The original loan was approximately $12,000. The vehicle 
was repossessed in 2008 or 2009. In her answer to the SOR, she stated she was 
working on a payment plan. She testified she contacted the creditor. She did not provide 
additional information to confirm she has taken any action to resolve this debt. The debt 
is not paid or resolved.8  
 
 Applicant stated she did not recognize the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($523) and 1.f 
($85). They appear to be for credit cards. Applicant stated she never received notice 
that the credit cards were being canceled. She indicated in her answer to the SOR that 
she was disputing these debts. She did not provide any documents to show what 
actions she has taken to dispute the debts. They are unresolved.9  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($5,677) is a timeshare that Applicant and her husband 
purchased in 2005 or 2006. They defaulted on the agreement. Applicant stated her 
husband included this debt in his bankruptcy. She did not provide documents to prove 
the debt is resolved.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($610) is owed to a cable company. She does not know 
what this debt is about as she currently has service with the company. She did not 
provide evidence of her actions to dispute or resolve the debt.11  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.m, and 1.o through 1.s ($377, $255, $247, 
$209, $150, $150, $149, $110 and $54 respectively) are medical debts. Applicant does 
not recognize some of the collection companies who now own the debts. In her answer 
to the SOR, she indicated she believed these were old medical bills, and she would be 
arranging payment plans with the creditors. She did not contact any of the creditors and 
has not arranged to pay any of the debts.12  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($156) appears to be an electric bill. Applicant stated she 
never had an electric bill from this company in her name. She testified that this debt 
could be from an apartment complex where she and her husband lived at one time, but 
she did not know. In her answer to the SOR, she stated her intention was to dispute the 
                                                          
7 Tr. 26-39, 54-56; GE 2 at page 8. 
 
8 Tr. 19-21, 40-41, 51-52. 
 
9 Tr. 41. 
 
10 Tr. 42-43. 
 
11 Tr. 43-44. 
 
12 Tr. 18, 44-45, 51. 
 
4 
debt. She indicated she telephonically contacted the credit bureau to dispute this debt. 
She did not provide documentary proof of actions to dispute or resolve the debt.13  
 
 Applicant believes she also owes approximately $105,000 for student loans on 
an account opened in 2006, which are in a deferred status due to financial hardship.14 
Except for some small payments after these loans initially became due, she has not 
made any other payments. Applicant attributes her inability to pay the student loans and 
other debts due to periods of unemployment and underemployment. She earned 
approximately $19,000 while employed as a teacher’s assistant, and she currently 
earns about $36,000. When she was living with her husband, he earned about $32,000. 
She acknowledges she lives paycheck to paycheck. She intends to either file for 
bankruptcy or consolidate her debts to resolve her financial issues. She made 
appointments with a bankruptcy law firm and a debt consolidation company to help her 
start addressing her delinquent debts.15   
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
13 Tr. 44-46, 54-57. 
 
14 GE 2. These debts are not considered for disqualifying purposes, but are considered when analyzing 
the whole person and the applicability of the mitigating conditions. The $105,000 student loan debt does 
not include the private loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
15 Tr. 19, 26, 46-50, 53.  
 
5 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concerns for financial considerations are set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated 19 delinquent debts totaling approximately $31,000. 
Some of the debts have been delinquent for more than six years. Applicant is unable or 
unwilling to pay or resolve her delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
6 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant believes the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved through her 
husband’s bankruptcy discharge. The documents she provided do not show the debt 
was discharged. She is still obligated to pay the judgment. The numerous debts in the 
SOR are still owed and unresolved. Based on Applicant’s past and current financial 
history, I cannot find that future financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her financial 
situation casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has been underemployed and unemployed for extended periods of 
time. She is separated from her husband. These conditions were beyond her control. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide proof that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Despite indicating in her answer that she was 
arranging a payment plan with medical creditors, she failed to contact them. She has 
not made an attempt to pay even the smallest debt. Although she was underemployed 
and unemployed she and her husband purchased a timeshare in 2005 or 2006 and then 
defaulted on the property. AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. 
 
 Applicant indicated she had intended to file for bankruptcy or seek a debt 
consolidation plan, but had not done anything before her hearing. There is no evidence 
she participated in financial counseling or made good-faith payments to pay creditors. 
There are not clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or under 
control. To the contrary, in addition to her delinquent debts, Applicant owes 
approximately $105,000 in student loan debt that is in a deferred status due to 
economic hardship. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
7 
 Applicant disputes many of the debts alleged, but did not do anything to 
determine their validity. She has not provided documented proof to substantiate her 
disputes or evidence that she is actively attempting to resolve the issue. I find AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has not made sufficient attempts to resolve her numerous delinquent 
debts. In addition to the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, she has an overwhelming 
amount of student loan debt that is deferred. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public 
trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs   1.a-1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
