 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01966 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges and the record establishes that 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Germany. She possesses a German 
passport that was issued in 2008 and is valid until 2018. She declined to relinquish or 
destroy her German passport. Foreign preference concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 1, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 5) On June 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference). (Item 
1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national security to grant or continue a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On August 1, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated September 29, 2014, was provided to her on December 5, 2014.1 Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted the SOR allegations.3 (Item 4) 
Applicant also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old scientist with highly-specialized knowledge and 
training, who contributes to the national defense.4 Her mother is a German citizen who 
resides in Germany. Her father has passed away.  
 
Applicant was born in Germany, and she moved to the United States in 1990, 
when she was 17 years old. She was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2006. She earned 
her bachelor, master, and Ph.D. degrees in the United States. Her husband and 
daughter were born in the United States and reside in the United States. She has 
previously been entrusted with sensitive U.S. Government information. A U.S. Navy 
captain described her valuable contributions to the United States. There is no evidence 
of security violations, alcohol or drug abuse, or criminal conduct. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Germany. She possesses a 
German passport that was issued in 2008 and remains valid until 2018. Although she 
has not used her German passport for travel, she said she wanted to retain it for 
possible travel. (Item 4) The FORM notes, “Applicant has refused to surrender or 
destroy her foreign passport; therefore, the Government’s concerns as to her suitability 
to hold a clearance have not been mitigated.” (FORM at 4) She has not relinquished or 
destroyed her German passport. 
 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated September 29, 
2014, and Applicant’s receipt is dated December 5, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that she had 30 days after her receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 1, 2014 response to the SOR. 
(Item 4) 
 
4The sources for the facts in this paragraph are Applicant’s August 1, 2014 response to the SOR 
and January 1, 2014 SF 86. (Items 4, 5) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
   
Analysis 
   
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes one condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case, “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.” Applicant renewed her German passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. She 
continues to possess a German passport that will be valid until 2018, establishing AG ¶ 
10(a)(1). 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not invalidate, destroy, or 
relinquish her German passport to her security officer. The FORM advised her that she 
could mitigate Foreign Preference concerns through AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e), however, 
she did not take action to effectuate these provisions.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 43-year-old scientist with highly-specialized knowledge and training, who 
contributes to the national defense. She was born in Germany, and she moved to the 
United States in 1990, when she was 17 years old. She was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen in 2006. Her college education was in the United States through the Ph.D. level. 
Her husband and daughter were born in the United States and reside in the United 
States. She has strong connections to the United States. She has previously been 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
entrusted with sensitive U.S. Government information. A U.S. Navy captain described 
her valuable contributions to the United States. There is no evidence of security 
violations, alcohol or drug abuse, or criminal conduct. 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has acknowledged that she is a dual United States and German 
citizen. She renewed her German passport in 2008, and it will not expire until 2018. She 
was advised that she needed to relinquish or destroy her German passport to mitigate 
the Government’s security concerns. She decided not to relinquish, invalidate, or 
destroy her German passport.   
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated foreign preference 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not provide evidence that will justify the award of a security 
clearance in the future. At some future time, she may decide to relinquish her German 
passport to her security officer or destroy it in her security officer’s presence, which will 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security clearance worthiness. See AG ¶¶ 
11(d) and 11(e). Based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am 
required to apply, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national security to 
grant or reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
I carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances 
in the context of the whole person. Foreign preference concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
