 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15188 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 29, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 12, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant and three witnesses testified on his behalf. He offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through OO, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions 
are incorporated into the findings of facts. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He honorably retired from the Army in 1995 in the 
paygrade E-7. Since his retirement he has worked for the federal government as a 
civilian employee and for a federal contractor. He has been employed with his current 
employer since 2010. He has been married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce, 
and he has three grown daughters. He has been married to his current wife for 12 
years.1  
 
Applicant has two driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) convictions. In 
1983, he was found guilty and fined for the offense. In 1993, he was again found guilty 
of DUI. He paid a fine, his military base driving privileges were suspended for one year, 
and he received a Letter of Reprimand. He does not recall if he was ordered to attend 
alcohol counseling.2 
 
In 1996, Applicant was charged with malicious wounding, a felony. The charge 
was dismissed in 1998, and he was ordered to attend anger management. The offense 
stemmed from an argument Applicant had with his first wife when he learned she had 
been unfaithful to him. An altercation ensued and Applicant slapped her, and she fell.3  
 
In March 2011, Applicant was at home talking on Skype to a female friend. The 
friend wanted to visit him. Applicant’s wife did not want the friend to visit. Applicant had 
consumed alcohol. He became agitated about the situation, and while talking to his 
friend, shot three rounds from his pistol into the ceiling of his home. He was in the home 
alone at the time. Because his friend was concerned about Applicant’s safety, she 
contacted his wife, who in turn contacted the police to execute a health and safety 
check. At the time, Applicant and his wife were having marital difficulties. When the 
police arrived they took Applicant into custody.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 25-32. 
 
2 Tr.42-47, 66, 93; GE 7 and 8. 
 
3 Tr. 41-42, 92; GE 9. 
 
4 Tr. 34-37, 84-91. 
 
3 
 
 
The police transported Applicant to a hospital for a mental evaluation due to the 
discharge of the firearm. Applicant understood the reason he was taken to the hospital 
was because he had shot a firearm, and people were concerned he would hurt himself. 
He spent approximately two days in the hospital. Although he had consumed alcohol 
prior to the incident, Applicant did not believe the reason he was sent to the hospital 
was because of an alcohol issue, but rather because of his marital issues and his use of 
a firearm. He stated he never discussed with anyone at the hospital his alcohol 
consumption, but he did disclose he had consumed alcohol before the incident. The 
discharge summary from Applicant’s hospital stay noted that Applicant believed he was 
in the hospital because he had a drink and shot his gun three times through the ceiling 
of his house. He was evaluated by a medical doctor who was board certified in adult, 
child, and adolescent psychiatry.5 The DSM-IV-TR discharge diagnoses stated:  
 
AXIS I: Mood Disorder NOS. Alcohol Abuse. 
AXIS II: None. 
AXIS III: COPD, IBS, sleep apnea, and history of motor vehicle accident. 
AXIS IV: Psychosocial stressors: Problems with primary support, marital 
problems. 
AXIS V: Discharge GAF: 50/60. 
 
The psychiatrist recommended Applicant follow up with a marriage counselor, which he 
did. His prognosis was “fair with treatment.” Applicant stated he had never seen the 
discharge summary until days before his hearing. He was unaware of its contents. He 
was unaware that the discharge summary included a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or any 
other diagnosis. Applicant’s wife reported the incident immediately to his facility security 
officer, and Applicant also reported it when he was released from the hospital.6 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct, a misdemeanor, for 
the event that took place in his home in March for discharging his firearm while 
intoxicated. He was found guilty and placed on probation for a year. He was ordered not 
to consume alcohol or have a firearm in his home for one year. He was released from 
probation after six months, and continued to comply with the one-year abstention 
requirement. He does not believe he has a problem with alcohol. The extent of his 
current alcohol consumption is possibly a drink once or twice a week with dinner. He 
does not drink to intoxication. Other than the incident above, he stated he does not 
handle firearms after consuming alcohol.7 
 
 Applicant answered “no” on his security clearance application (SCA) dated 
February 5, 2010, in response to Section 22, which asked if he had ever been charged 
with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. He also answered “no” to the inquiry if he 
had ever been charged with any felony offense. During Applicant’s personal subject 
                                                          
5 Tr. 37-39, 62-67, 112-113; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 39-41, 47-48, 65-67, 79; GE 4. 
 
7 Tr. 34, 77-83; 97; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 
interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management, Applicant 
denied having alcohol-specific treatment or counseling. In response to interrogatories, 
he denied receiving any medical treatment, counseling, or supportive treatment from a 
drug or alcohol rehabilitation center or other organization.8 
 
 Applicant explained that he believed he was sent to the hospital because he 
discharged a firearm and not for an alcohol problem. He did not believe he had been 
treated for an alcohol problem, therefore he had nothing to disclose. Because he only 
recently became aware of the contents of the discharge summary, he did not disclose to 
the government investigator that he had alcohol treatment or counseling. All of 
Applicant’s subsequent counseling related to his marriage. Applicant stated that he did 
not disclose his 1993 or 1983 DUI convictions or felony arrest because he believed the 
questions only referred to disclosing offenses within the past seven years. He stated he 
misread the question. He disclosed the felony arrest on his 2003 SCA.9 
 
 The DOD CAF requested Applicant obtain an evaluation by a credentialed 
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. The evaluation was required to consider the 
information contained in Applicant’s interrogatory. An evaluation was conducted by a 
licensed clinical social worker, who is a psychotherapist. Based on her evaluation, 
Applicant did not meet the criterial for a diagnosis of alcohol abuse. He did meet the 
criteria for a diagnosis of substance intoxication, due to impaired judgment at the time 
he fired his gun three times into his ceiling in his home.10  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. She is a retired federal employee and was 
familiar with requirements for completing a SCA. She assisted Applicant when he 
completed his SCA and interrogatory. She confirmed that Applicant did not disclose his 
hospital stay because he was not admitted for alcohol treatment, but rather because he 
shot his gun and the concern was for his safety, or that he might be suicidal at the time. 
She indicated they were having serious marital problems at the time, and she had 
sought advice from an attorney, causing Applicant to be distressed. She also confirmed 
that they discussed with a “clearance lady” whether he needed to disclose his prior 
felony arrest and were told by her that he only needed to go back seven years. 
Applicant’s wife was aware of an assault incident with his ex-wife, but was not aware 
that it was a felony charge. In his wife’s previous job before she retired, she assisted 
people with completing the SCA, and she believed they only had to disclose information 
within the past seven years. She acknowledged she gave her husband incorrect 
advice.11  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 48-50, 53-65; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. 49-51, 53-67, 69-70, 73; GE 1 and 6. 
 
10 Tr. 51-53, 70-73; GE 5. 
 
11 Tr. 32, 99, 119-135. 
 
5 
 
 
 I find Applicant did not deliberately omit, conceal, or falsify relevant facts when he 
completed his SCA. Applicant had previously disclosed on an earlier SCA his felony 
arrest. Because his two DUIs occurred 17 years and 27 years earlier, his belief that they 
did not need to be disclosed because they were beyond seven years was reasonable. 
In addition, he relied on his wife who was familiar with the completion of the application.  
 
 I also find that Applicant did not provide false or misleading information to the 
government investigator when he did not disclose alcohol counseling or treatment 
because he did not know that he was diagnosed with alcohol abuse, and he reasonably 
believed the reason he was admitted to the hospital related to the discharge of a firearm 
in his house. His follow-up treatment was with a marriage counselor, which was the 
recommendation he received upon discharge. This explanation is also consistent with 
why he did not make a similar disclosure in his interrogatory.   
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that she grew up in a family where her father was an 
alcoholic, and it had a major effect on her. She does not believe Applicant has an 
alcohol issue, but acknowledged he likely would not have shot his gun if he had not 
consumed some alcohol. When he was released from the hospital, they went to 
marriage counseling. They have resolved their marital issues and have a good 
relationship.12  
 
 A former supervisor, who served with Applicant while they were in the military 
and has recently worked with him in his civilian job, testified that he has never known 
Applicant to have any alcohol-related problems. He would never question Applicant’s 
integrity. He stated that Applicant is an excellent worker who is well-respected.13 
 
 Applicant’s upper-level supervisor, who has known Applicant since 2009, testified 
that Applicant is one of his best employees. He considers him loyal and faithful. He is a 
person who knows what needs to get done and then completes the task. He and 
Applicant shoot guns together. The witness does not shoot with anyone who has been 
drinking. He and Applicant socialize together. The witness has never observed 
Applicant consume alcohol. He has never questioned Applicant’s integrity.14  
 
 Applicant provided numerous documents, including performance appraisals, 
awards, letters of appreciation, military medals, military evaluations, and certificates of 
achievements.15  
 
Policies 
 
                                                          
12 Tr. 105-115. 
 
13 Tr. 137-144. 
 
14 Tr. 144-162. 
 
15 AE A through OO. 
 
6 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets out the security concern relating to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under personal conduct AG ¶ 16 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 (b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant discharged a firearm in his home after consuming alcohol and was 
found guilty of disorderly conduct in March 2011. He was arrested in 1996 for malicious 
wounding, a felony. He was convicted of DUI in 1993 and 1993. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) 
apply to these facts.  
 
I found Applicant did not intentionally or deliberately failed to disclose that he 
participated in alcohol counseling or treatment in his interrogatory or during his personal 
 
8 
 
 
subject interview by a government investigator, or that he had been diagnosed with 
alcohol abuse. I also did not find Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA by failing to 
disclose he was charged with a felony or information about his two DUI convictions. My 
analysis is stated above. Therefore, none of the above disqualifying conditions apply to 
these allegations. I find in favor of Applicant on those allegations. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that when he shot his gun in the ceiling he had 
consumed alcohol and was upset with his wife. They were experiencing marital 
problems at the time. Since then they completed marriage counseling and are together 
leading happy lives. Applicant has not repeated any similar behavior. His conduct 
happened under unique circumstances. The factors and stressors that were affecting 
Applicant’s behavior are no longer present and similar conduct is unlikely to recur. 
Applicant was recently re-evaluated by a licensed clinical social worker who did not find 
that he was an alcohol abuser.  Applicant consumes alcohol responsibly, and there 
have been no additional incidents. Applicant’s earlier DUIs were 17 and 27 years ago. 
These events are mitigated by the passage of time. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He served honorably in the military. He provided 
considerable information about his exemplary and outstanding work performance and 
military career. He had two DUI convictions, one in 1983 and another in 1993. An 
incident involving a firearm created a concern in March 2011. Applicant was dealing 
with the stress of marital problems and reacted inappropriately. He sought counseling 
with his wife and their problems have been resolved. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
