1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 11-14499
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 5, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 20, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Trustworthiness determination Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 2.2
Item 2.3
2
Applicant received the SOR. He submitted a notarized, written response to the
SOR allegations dated December 30, 2014, and he requested a decision on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on March 30, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on April 3,
2015. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a timely response. DOHA assigned
this case to me on April 27, 2015. The Government submitted three exhibits, which
have been marked as Items 1-3 and admitted into the record. The SOR and Applicant’s
response to the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM is
admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -
1.k of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegation in ¶ 1.l of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to1
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 41 years old, works as a systems administrator for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in March 2012. Appellant previously
worked for federal contractors as a technical support engineer from August 2006 until
September 2011 and as a system administrator from June 2003 until August 2006. The
record lacks any evidence of disciplinary problems at work. Applicant served in the
United States Navy on active duty and in the active reserve from 1993 until 2000, when
he received an honorable discharge.2
Applicant graduated from high school in 1992, and he received an associate’s
degee in technology in December 2005. Applicant and his wife married in November
1998. They have two children, ages 14 and 9.3
Item 1, Response to SOR; AE A.4
Item 2; AE A.5
Item 1; Item 3; AE A.6
Item 1 - Response o SOR; Item 3; AE A.7
Item 1.8
3
In September 2011, Applicant’s work with a federal contractor ended at the
conclusion of the contract. Around the same time, his wife lost her job when her
employer downsized. Applicant was unemployed for six months, and his wife was
unemployed for more than one year.4
The loss of employment by Applicant and his wife created serious financial
problems for them. They became delinquent in their bills as well as their federal and
state taxes for the 2011 tax year. Upon his return to work, Applicant began to correct his
problematic financial situation in a systematic manner. They resolved their tax debts by
March 2013. Upon the advice of their financial advisor, they prioritized the debts to be
resolved. After their taxes, they gave top priority to their past-due mortgage debt and
past-due education loan payments.5
SOR allegation 1.a concerns Applicant’s past-due mortgage payments. Applicant
and his wife prepared and filed the necessary paperwork for a home loan modification.
Their mortgage lender notified them on March 3, 2015 that they had successfully
modified their mortgage loan. Through this process, Applicant reduced his monthly
mortgage payment from approximately $1,700 a month to $960 a month based on a
statement of his account information sheet dated March 16, 2015. This document
reflects that Applicant made his first monthly payment on March 6, 2015.6
Applicant’ second largest SOR debt (¶ 1.j $20,257) relates to education loans.
The creditor granted him forbearance on this debt, which expired shortly after he
returned to work in 2012. In the summer of 2014, Applicant contacted the creditor for his
education loans and made arrangements to rehabilitate the loans. He complied with the
terms to rehabilitate his loans, as indicated in a December 31, 2014 letter from the new
creditor. His current monthly payments are approximately $127. He is current on these
payments. The March 2015 credit report reflects that the debt to the creditor identified in
the SOR is a paid collection, and the account has a zero balance.7
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he had contacted the
creditor in allegation 1.b ($2,328) and arranged a payment plan. He did not articulate
the specifics of the plan, and he did not provide any documentation showing that he had
made payments under the plan.8
The March 2015 credit report shows that Applicant paid three state liens totaling
$5,900 and that the state released the liens between October 2013 and May 2014. The
Item 3.9
Item 1 - Item 3.10
Item 3.11
4
credit report reflects that the medical debts in SOR allegations 1.g ($110) and 1.h
($110) are paid. The same credit report shows two $34 debts with the same account
number (SOR allegation 1.e). One debt is paid, and one debt is unpaid. Based on the
account number in SOR allegation 1.k, the credit report indicates that the actual amount
of the debt is $34 and that it is paid. The $182 debt in SOR allegations 1.c and 1.f are
the same based on the account number. The $35 and $95 medical debts listed in SOR
allegations 1.d and 1.i are not shown on this credit report, but Applicant admitted owing
these debts, which are not paid.   9
Applicant denied the $384 apartment judgment identified in SOR allegation 1.l,
stating that he never lived in this apartment complex. This debt is not listed on the
March 2015 credit report, the only credit report in the record. Applicant’s e-QIP reflects
that he has owned his present home since January 2008 and that he previously owned
a home from September 2003 until January 2008. In his answer, Applicant advised that
he was working with a credit service to have this debt removed from his credit report.10
Applicant has not provided a budget or a copy of the monthly earnings statement
for him and his wife. The March 2015 credit report lists six medical bills and notes that
four are paid. The credit report also shows 16 other credit entries, with only two past-
due. One past-due debt is his mortgage, which is now current, and the other past-due
debt is the $2,328 debt in SOR allegation 1.b. Based on a review of all the information
in the record and the SOR, Applicant’s unpaid medical bills total $346. The record
indicates that Applicant met with a financial advisor at some time. It is unknown if this
individual provided budgeting advice.11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect sensitive [classified information]. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
6
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems in 2011 and 2012 when he
was unable to pay all his bills. Most of the debts had not been resolved as of the time of
the issuance of the SOR. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems arose when he and his wife simultaneously lost
their jobs, factors beyond his control. He was unemployed for about six months, and
she was unemployed for more than one year. This loss of income severely impacted
their finances. Once he returned to work, Applicant began the slow process of paying
his past-due debts and rebuilding his finances. He applied to modify his mortgage loan
and he resolved his tax issues. He did not ignore his debts. He acted responsibly under
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.
Applicant acted in good faith when he contacted the creditor holding his
education loans and developed a payment plan to rehabilitate the loans, which he
successfully did. He also paid several small medical bills. Given the record evidence of
debt resolution and rehabilitation, his statement that he is paying the $2,328 debt
identified in allegation 1.b is credible. Applicant received guidance from his financial
advisor on a method to repay his debts. The March 2015 credit report, the education
loan rehabilitation, and the modification of his mortgage loan reflect that his finances are
under control. He has mitigated security concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d).
Finally, Applicant had a legitimate reason to dispute the judgment listed in
allegation 1.l as not his because he lived in residential homes owned by him for at least
nine years before the entry of the judgment in 2012. Since the judgment is not listed on
7
the March 2015 credit report, it is inferred that he successfully disputed this debt. AG ¶
20(e) applies to SOR allegation 1.l only.
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
8
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
developed significant financial problems when he and his wife lost their jobs in 2011. He
returned to work after six months of unemployment, and she returned to work after more
than a year of unemployment. The loss of income for this long period of time seriously
impacted their ability to pay their usual and customary living expenses. Once he
returned to work, Applicant began the slow process of repaying his past-due debts while
paying his normal monthly living expenses. He paid his tax debt within a year of
returning to work. He successfully rehabilitated his education loans and obtained a
modification of his mortgage loan. His remaining debts totaled less than $3,000 and are
paid or being paid. Applicant did not ignore his debts nor did he incur large, unpaid
credit card debts while unemployed. He managed to keep his unpaid debts within
reason and when he was able, he took action to pay them. Applicant is not an individual
who spends money needlessly or excessively. Rather, except for unemployment, he
managed his income and expenses. He has taken control of his unpaid debts and is in a
better financial situation than he was a few years ago. The issue in financial cases is not
simply whether all an applicant’s debts are paid; it is whether an applicant’s financial
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. While a few
small debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG &
2(a)(1).) The evidence reflects the ongoing efforts by Applicant to regain control over his
finances and to pay his past-due debts. He prioritized his debts, and he developed a
plan of action to pay his debts. He has an established track record of debt payment. His
past financial problems are not a security concern.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
