 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07908 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF adjudicators could not make the 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. On July 17, 2014, Applicant answered 
the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
2 
 
 
On February 11, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) that contained documents marked as Items 1 through 3. On February 11, 2015, 
a copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant, giving him 30 days from its receipt to 
submit objections or provide additional information. He received the FORM on February 
18, 2015, and did not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on April 3, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for that contractor since March 2012. He graduated from high school in 1992. 
He reported no military service. He married for the second time in 2005. He has two 
children, ages, 4 and 9, and two stepchildren, ages 15 and 17. He is seeking a security 
clearance for the first time.1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 14 delinquent debts totaling about $45,896 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.n). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the 
allegations. For the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.m (a debt alleged to be 180 days or more past 
due in the amount of $16,953), he indicated that the account was in “good standing 
(Remodify)” His response to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.m is considered a denial. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on March 26, 2012. He disclosed that he was unemployed from September 
2011 to February 2012, after being laid off from a job. He also disclosed that he had 15 
delinquent debts, and the reason for those delinquencies was “lack of work/income.”3 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that three of his family members 
(stepfather, mother-in-law, and father-in-law) passed away since he started his current 
job and that the past few years had been stressful and emotional. He attributed his 
financial problems to being laid off from a job of 20 years and losing overtime work 
during the recession in 2007 and 2008. He stated that, due to those financial hardships, 
he fell behind on paying his debts as he was supporting a family of six. He indicated that 
he had plans to pay the debts as financial resources become available and that he 
never thought of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.4 
  
 A credit report dated April 12, 2012, reflected that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m 
was a conventional real estate mortgage loan that had a date of last activity of October 
                                                          
1 Item 2.  
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 2. 
4 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
2011 and was 180 days past due in the amount of $20,962. Applicant did not provide 
any documentation to support his claim that this mortgage loan had been modified and 
it was now in good standing.5 
 
 No documentation was submitted to show that Applicant made any payments 
towards the delinquent debts or that he entered into any repayment agreement to 
resolve them. Because no budgetary information was provided, the amount of his 
monthly income, expenses, and debt payments are unknown.6 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
5 Items 1 and 3. 
 
6 Items 1 through 3. 
 
4 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Because Applicant accumulated debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period, the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are 
potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 During the recession of 2007 and 2008, Applicant lost overtime work. In 2011, 
he was unemployed for six months after being laid off from a job. In the past three 
years, three members of his family passed away. While these events were conditions 
beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems, he does not receive full 
credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because he has not established that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. No documentation was presented to show that he has taken 
any steps to resolve the alleged debts. Furthermore, no documentation was presented 
to show his income and current financial situation. It is unknown whether he has the 
means to begin resolving some or all of these debts. From the evidence presented, I am 
unable to find that his financial problems are under control or are being resolved. His 
delinquent debts are ongoing, significant, and continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
 
6 
 
 
a determination.7 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. Doubts remain about his current eligibility for access to classified 
information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance 
must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:     Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 The administrative judge should consider the adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
