1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06236 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg Wicketts, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleges Applicant had five past-due, charged-off, or collection accounts totaling 
more than $25,000. A creditor wrote off one delinquent account after Applicant paid 
approximately $1,900 and asserts he paid $1,200 on another debt. Even with payment 
of these two delinquent accounts, he has failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 20, 
2014, the DoD issued an SOR detailing financial considerations security concerns. DoD 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
2 
 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On November 10, 2014, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On January 15, 2015, I was assigned the case. On 
January 28, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing convened on February 13, 2015. I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through Q, without objection. 
Applicant testified at the hearing as did three other Applicant witnesses, which included 
the facility security officer.  
 
The record was held open for ten days to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. No additional documents were received. Applicant was again informed to 
submit any documents he wished to have considered by April 14, 2015. No documents 
were received. On February 24, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he indicated he had paid one debt (SOR 1.d, 
$1,339), was making payments on one another (SOR 1.e, $1,010), was attempting to 
settle another (SOR 1.b, $1,403), and was disputing the two remaining debts (SOR 1.a, 
$17,800 and SOR 1.c, $4,211). (SOR Answer, Ex. G) I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employed as a defense contractor working in systems 
administration and database administration. (Tr. 21) He has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 1998 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant was on 
active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 1984 until 1994. He separated with an honorable 
discharge at the rank of sergeant (E-4). (Tr. 22) Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, 
and friends state: Applicant is hard working, focused on the job, and shows commitment 
to excellence. (Tr. 48 – 53)  
 
In 2007, Applicant’s wife became unemployed from her job working in customer 
service. (Tr. 38) At the time, she was making $5.50 per hour and working 20 to 30 hours 
per week. (Tr. 38) She is still unemployed. Applicant’s annual salary is $43,000. (Tr. 38) 
He has two children living with him. One is a high school senior and the other is a high 
school freshman. (Tr. 55) Up until three years ago, he had four or five children in the 
home. (Tr. 55)  
 
In 2013, Applicant started working with a legal firm to assist him in resolving his 
financial matters. (Ex. E) He stayed with the firm until the one debt was paid. (Tr. 24) In 
2013, Applicant entered into a repayment agreement to pay a past-due account (SOR 
1.d, $1,339). He paid the firm $50 bi-weekly for 32 months. (Ex. 3, Tr. 42) As of January 
2014, he had paid $1,908 and had agreed to make eleven more $50 monthly payments 
to pay the debt. (Ex. C) The debt has now been paid. (Tr. 23, 42) 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
3 
 
In November 2013, Applicant was removed from the project he was a working on 
for his employer due to his lack of having a clearance. His salary then dropped from 
approximately $80,000 to $43,000. (Tr. 43, 59)  
 
 In February 2014, Applicant enlisted the services of a company to help him with 
his finances and debt. (Ex. 3, K, L, M, P) He entered into a debt-settlement agreement 
to assist him in eliminating debt and improving his credit. (Ex. M) All five SOR debts are 
listed in the agreement. (Ex. P) He asserted he pays the company $228 monthly. (Tr. 
44) He provided no documentation showing actual payment to the company. The 
company provides a financial counseling service, which he asserts has helped him to 
improved his credit score to above the city’s average for the city in which he lived, 
annually saved $1,400 in home insurance, $540 in automobile insurance, and $2,450 
on television and cable services. (Tr. 31) He learned about budgeting and “wants and 
needs.” (Tr. 32) The company sent letters to the credit reporting agencies asking that 
the debts listed in Applicant’s credit reports be verified. (Tr. 32)  
 
 In March and April 2012, Applicant was asked about his finances during a 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI). At that time, he did not have any knowledge about a 
number of bills listed on his credit report, including the collection debt listed in SOR 1.a 
($17,800). (Ex. 3) At that time, he intended to order a copy of his credit report, find out 
about the debts, and take care of them as soon as possible. (Ex. 3) Three years later, at 
the hearing, he stated he was still trying to find out about this debt. (Tr. 25) On his 
September 2014 credit report, he disputed this debt. (Ex. 4, Tr. 25) 
 
 In February 2014, Applicant completed written financial interrogatories. (Ex. 3) At 
that time, his Personal Financial Statement (PFS) stated his net monthly income was 
approximately $5,000. His net monthly expenses were approximately $3,600, and his 
monthly debt payment was approximately $1,200. (Ex. 3) His net monthly remainder 
(income less monthly expenses and debt payment) was $170. 
 
 In May 2015, Applicant intends to start paying on the collection account listed in 
SOR 1.e ($1,010). He will start making payments after a non-SOR bank debt has been 
paid. (Tr. 30) He asserts he has paid $1,200 on this other debt, but provided no 
documentation. (Tr. 35)  
 
 In May 1994, Applicant purchased a home for $94,000. He estimates he is about 
a month behind on the mortgage payments. (Ex. 3, Tr. 39) In mid-2012, he purchased a 
$14,000 vehicle. He is current on the $360 monthly payments. (Tr. 40) He is current on 
his utility bills. He has approximately $20,000 in his company’s 401(k) retirement plan. 
(Tr. 41) He has a $3,000 to $4,000 loan on that account which he took out a year ago to 
catch up on other bills. (Tr. 41)  
 
 At the point of closing arguments, Applicant was again informed of the need to 
provide documentation supporting any assertion of payment on his delinquent debts. 
(Tr. 63) No documents were received. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had one past-due 
account, one charged-off account, and three collection accounts that totaled 
approximately $25,700. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating factors fully mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. All but one of the SOR debts remains unpaid. Applicant has not 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to 
bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. He 
has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are multiple and remain unpaid. He has worked 
for the same employer since June 1998. In March and April 2012, he became aware of 
the Government’s concerns over his finances and delinquent accounts. As of January 
2014, he had paid $1,900 on a past-due account and asserted he had paid $1,200 on a 
non-SOR debt. Having paid approximately $3,000 during the last three years fails to 
show responsible action in addressing the debts. Moreover, he failed to provide 
documentation proving he had made actual payment on his delinquent debts even 
though such documentation was specifically requested. He has failed to act timely or 
responsibly under the circumstances. He failed to resolve his debts and failed to reduce 
his delinquencies.  
 
In 2007, Applicant’s wife became unemployed resulting in the loss of an annual 
income of approximately $8,500. In November 2013, his salary was reduced from 
$80,000 to $43,000 when a lack of a security clearance forced his removal from the 
project on which he was working. However, he knew of the Government’s concern 
about his delinquent accounts a year and a half before the reduction in his salary. 
 
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his or her control, the Judge could still consider whether 
Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial 
difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR 
Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
In 2012, Applicant was asked about the largest of the SOR debts (SOR 1.a, 
$17,800). At that time, he had no information about the debt. Three years later, at the 
hearing, he still had no information about the debt.  
 
7 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because, to date, 
Applicant’s efforts to address his delinquent accounts have been minimal. As previously 
stated, his financial problems increased eight years ago when his wife became 
unemployment and further impacted a year and a half ago when his income was 
reduced by half. However, the small amount of payment he has made on his debts does 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His wife’s 
unemployment and his sizable decrease in salary were events beyond his control. But 
for the reasons already stated, he has not acted responsibly under the circumstances to 
address his delinquent accounts.  
 
Under AG & 20(c), Applicant has received financial counseling which has 
enabled him to improve his credit score, lower his insurance bills, and reduce his 
monthly television and cable bill. However, his finances are in such a state that he is still 
runs late on making his mortgage payments. He paid the debt listed in SOR 1.d.and AG 
& 20(d) applies to that debt. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply 
because he failed to provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed 
account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Eight years ago, his wife became unemployed and in 
November 2013, his salary was sizably reduced. Additionally, he had ten years of 
honorable service with the U.S. Air Force, and he has had 15 years of service in his 
current DoD contractor position.  
 
8 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While his wife’s unemployment and his salary reduction were circumstances beyond his 
control, he has made minimal payments on his delinquent accounts during the past 
three years. His failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to 
arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” for financial progress includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that 
is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider 
the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to 
which that plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may 
provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that 
the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
9 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
