1The SOR is undated.  DOHA sent the SOR to Applicant accompanied by a letter dated March 7, 2014.  
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge made findings about Applicant’s most recent bankruptcy filing and about
her work record.  Applicant’s argument that the Judge did not take into account the
circumstances surrounding her bankruptcy filing and her excellent work record is not sufficient
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-01755.a1
DATE: 04/10/2015
DATE: April 10, 2015
In Re:
--------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-01755
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  DoD
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–security
concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).1  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 29,
2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In 1991, Applicant was discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  After that, she and her spouse
took out first and second mortgages on a home that they had purchased in 1987.  In the mid-2000s,
Applicant’s spouse stopped working due to medical disability, as a consequence of which their
income dropped.  They began falling behind on their mortgage payments and on other debts, such
as consumer credit obligations.  In completing her security clearance application (SCA), Applicant
did not disclose any delinquent debts.  During her interview, she stated that she had learned about
the mortgage delinquency after completing the SCA.  In order to save their home, Applicant and her
spouse filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection.  However, the case was subsequently dismissed
at the petitioners’ request.  Applicant then filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in her own
name only.  This too was dismissed due to Applicant’s inability to make the payments.  Applicant
and her spouse have succeeded in modifying their mortgage payments.  Applicant subsequently went
on family medical leave to care for her spouse.  She has incurred medical expenses as a result of his
treatment.  Among her other debts are a judgment against her to recover the deficiency balance on
a repossessed truck and a dental bill that has been sent to collection.  
In August 2014, Applicant filed again for Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  She completed a credit
counseling course prior to filing.  Applicant’s employment income for the first eight months of 2014
was over $28,000.  She also had some unemployment income, and her husband received over
$17,000 in Social Security Disability payments.  She has no cash on hand, no savings, and no
checking deposits.  
Applicant has an excellent work record, described as a “top-flight employee and an asset to
[the] team.”  Decision at 7.  She enjoys a good reputation for honesty and reliability.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant’s financial problems were more extensive than alleged in
the SOR.  She considered non-charged debts as part of the whole-person analysis and mitigation.
The Judge noted circumstances that were outside Applicant’s control, such as medical problems
which limited her and her spouse’s ability to work.  However, she concluded that Applicant had
mismanaged her finances, including purchasing a timeshare, which the Judge characterized as
irresponsible in light of her history of financial difficulties.  The Judge gave Applicant credit for
paying some of her debts, though stated that a bankruptcy filing in and of itself does not show a
good-faith effort to resolve financial problems.  
In the whole-person analysis the Judge noted evidence that Applicant had issued an
insufficient funds check.  She stated that, after dismissal of her 2013 bankruptcy filing, Applicant
did little to resolve her debts until a year later, when she filed for bankruptcy again.  The Judge cited
to evidence of Applicant’s good work performance.  However, she stated that Applicant’s failure
to address such important debts as home and vehicle loans undermined her effort to show that she
had mitigated the concerns in her case.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge did not take into account all of the circumstances
surrounding her bankruptcy filing, for example that some of her debts have been paid and others are
being repaid through the trustee in bankruptcy.  She also argues that the Judge did not take into
account that she has worked for many years and has an excellent work record.  The Judge made
findings about Applicant’s most recent bankruptcy filing and about her work record.  Applicant’s
argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record.  Neither has Applicant shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01941 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 30,
2015).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
