 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-07393 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 6, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 28, 2014, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated January 20, 2015, was provided to him by letter the 
same day. Applicant received the FORM on February 2, 2015. He was afforded a period 
of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant timely submitted additional information within the allotted period of 30 days 
after receipt of a copy of the FORM. On March 17, 2015, Department Counsel indicated 
that he had no objection to Applicant’s additional information. On March 20, 2015, the 
case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old engineering technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor sponsor since June 2010. He seeks a security clearance in 
conjunction with his current employment. (Item 5) Applicant previously held a security 
clearance from 1990 to 2005 while working for a defense contractor. (FORM response) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1983. He served in the U.S. Army as an 
enlisted soldier from 1985 to 1987, and in the Army National Guard from 1987 to 1988. 
Applicant was awarded a diploma in electronics from a trade school in 1993. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant was married from 1989, separated in 2006, and divorced in 2010. He 
had two adult children. Applicant remarried in 2014. (Item 5, FORM response) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains eight separate allegations: (1) an automobile 
repossession collection account for $9,306; (2) a past-due account from a credit union 
for $928; (3) a collection account from a cable company for $186; (4) a judgment for 
credit card debt filed in 2009 for $8,159; (5) a judgment for credit card debt filed in 2008 
for $11,624; (6) a collection account from a cell phone company for $1,093; (7) a 
collection account for a medical bill for $85; and (8) a collection account for a medical 
bill for $87. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h; SOR answer; FORM response) 
 
There is substantial evidence to support the SOR allegations and that Applicant 
has a history of financial problems that stem back to at least 2008. As noted, Applicant 
admitted all of the SOR debts with explanations. His debts are further substantiated by 
his e-QIP, March 2013 and July 2014 credit reports, and his July 2014 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (Items 4, 5, 6, 7, 8) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce, coupled with the fact 
that his now former spouse was responsible for, and mishandled their finances without 
his knowledge. He also experienced two brief periods of unemployment from 
September to December 2008, and from March to June 2010. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant provided documentation that he paid debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c ($186) and 1.h ($87), totaling $273. (Item 4) Most problematic is the fact that he 
has not provided documentation that he has paid or otherwise resolved the two 
judgments and largest debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($8,159) and 1.e ($11,624), filed in 2009 
and 2008, respectively. (Item 4) Applicant stated in his November 2014 SOR answer, 
“I’m hoping within the next six months these 2 judgments will be cleaned up.” (Item 4) 
Nor has Applicant provided documentation that he included the amount indicated on the 
IRS Form 1099-C he received for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($9,306) in his federal and state 
tax returns. (Item 4) He did submit documentation in his FORM response that his 
account in SOR ¶ 1.b ($928) is current. (FORM response) 
 
Applicant stated in his FORM response that he has attempted to resolve the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,093 cell phone collection account) and was advised by the creditor that 
this account was “closed” and could be “removed” from his credit report. Applicant 
provided no documentation that this account was paid or removed from his credit report 
nor did he provide documentation that he paid or otherwise resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.g ($85). (Item 4, FORM response) There is no record evidence showing Applicant 
utilized credit counseling or assistance with budgeting.  
 
Applicant stated that he is in the process of selling property belonging to him and 
his former spouse and he intends to use the proceeds of that sale to pay off his two 
judgments. (FORM response) Apart from these delinquent debts, he claims to be 
current on all of his other monthly debts. (Item 6, FORM response) At the time he 
responded to DOHA interrogatories in July 2014, Applicant reported a net monthly 
remainder of $2,960. (Item 4) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted a reference letter from a former co-worker and friend (CW). 
CW has known Applicant since 1995. CW described Applicant as a hard worker, an 
involved father, and an individual of good moral character. (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The evidence establishes the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Considering the record evidence as a whole,1 I conclude ¶ 19(d) applies to the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h and these debts are mitigated. However, none of the 
five financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially 
applicable to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern to the other remaining 
SOR debts. The available information shows that Applicant has taken little affirmative 
action to resolve his remaining delinquent debts despite having the apparent means to 
do so. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts or 
enforcing tax laws.2 Rather the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In 
evaluating F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is not requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer evidence of 
financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to address his 
delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on the limited 
written record, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
                                                          
1
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
2
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this Decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
Applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,4 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.c:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
