1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 12-05561
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s student loans total almost $80,000. They came due after he left
school in 2002, but he has not made any payments or otherwise addressed those debts
since 2007. Despite having the means to do so, Applicant also has not paid or
otherwise tried to resolve six other debts, which total about $2,300. Applicant’s request
for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 16, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for public trust position as part of
his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to determine that
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were2
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
2
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request
for a position of trust.  1
On September 12, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through
the adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant2
timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on January 19, 2015, and I convened a hearing on February 10, 2015.
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibit
(Ax.) A. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on February 26, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $81,481 for
eight delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). Most of the total debt consists of two
delinquent student loans (SOR 1.b and 1.c) totaling $79,171. Applicant admitted all of
the debts except SOR 1.d, which he claims was paid in 2012 or 2013. He also disputed
SOR 1.g, an account which he claimed he cancelled but for which he was still charged.
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, and based on all available
information, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 37 years old and is employed by a defense contractor in a position
that requires eligibility for a position of trust, because his employer supports
management of the health care system used by members of the military. Applicant must
be deemed suitable to be entrusted with personally identifiable information (PII)
associated with the health care system’s constituents. Applicant was hired by his
current employer in February 2012. (Gx. 1)
Applicant and his wife have been married since August 2007 and have three
children (ages 8, 6 and 1) together. Applicant’s wife is a preschool teacher. Since about
2003, Applicant has worked in the information technology (IT) field. In 2011, he left an
IT job with a cable television company by mutual agreement with his employer over
concerns about his performance. While employed there, he received free unlimited
cable television service at his home. However, after he left, he was charged for those
services and still owes the cable company $702. (Gx. 1 - 3; Tr. 45)
Applicant attended college between 1997 and 2002, but did not finish his degree.
He left school for personal reasons, but never returned to school once those matters
 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).3
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 4
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 5
3
were resolved. The debts alleged at SOR 1.b and 1.c are delinquent student loans
Applicant obtained for his college education. (Gx. 1 - 4; Tr. 26 - 27)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed his delinquent student loans.
The remaining SOR allegations are based on subsequent credit reports and were
discussed during a subject interview of Applicant by a Government investigator in March
2012. At the interview, Applicant stated that he would obtain a copy of his credit report
and make payment arrangements with his creditors within 90 days. However, at his
hearing, Applicant did not provide any information showing that he has acted to pay or
otherwise resolve his past-due debts, most of which are less than $500 each and have
been delinquent since before he married. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4)
Applicant and his wife earn about $4,600 in net monthly income. According to a
personal financial statement (PFS) obtained from Applicant by DOD adjudicators in
February 2014, Applicant had about $375 remaining each month after expenses,
including two monthly car payments. However, since then one of his cars was stolen
and, after his insurance covered the loss, he no longer has to make the $477 car
payment he listed in his PFS. This should leave about $850 remaining each month; but
Applicant did not explain why he has not at least paid some of his smaller
delinquencies. (Gx. 1 and 4; Tr. 29 - 31)
Applicant disputes responsibility for the debt for unpaid rent or repairs to an
apartment in 2012 at SOR 1.e. He also claimed the debt at SOR 1.f was satisfied
through a wage garnishment, and that he should not have to pay the debt at SOR 1.g,
stating that he cancelled the account but was charged for it anyway. Applicant did not
provide any documentation to support his claims. (Answer; Gx. 4; Tr. 37 - 38)
Applicant has a good reputation in the community. He volunteers as a coach for
youth sports and is active in his church. Applicant is regarded as having good moral
character, and is considered honest and trustworthy. (Ax. A)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III  are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In3 4
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also5
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 6
 Directive. 6.3.7
4
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.  Each decision must be a6
fair, impartial, and commonsense determination based on examination of all available
relevant and material information,  and must include consideration of the pertinent7
criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative guidelines. 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new
guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect sensitive information as his or her
own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access should be
resolved in favor of the Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following mitigating conditions available under AG ¶
20:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
None of these mitigating conditions is applicable to the facts and circumstances
presented. AG ¶ 20(f) is not pertinent here as no facts or allegations were presented
regarding unexplained affluence. The other AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions do not apply
because Applicant did not present information to establish them. He has made no
payments on his student loans since 2007, and there is no plan in place to resolve his
6
debts. Applicant disputes at least two of his debts, but he did not corroborate the basis
for those disputes. Applicant is not expected to debt free; however, his failure to take
any action regarding his past-due debts, especially after stating in his subject interview
three years ago that he would do so, reasonably undermines the Government’s
confidence in his reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant has not mitigated the
trustworthiness concerns raised by his financial problems.
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Specifically, I note that Applicant is a good
employee and is active in his community. However, this positive information is not
sufficient to overcome the adverse inferences raised by his financial problems. The
Government’s information raised reasonable doubts about Applicant’s suitability for a
position of trust. Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal
goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the granting of such
eligibility.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP
eligibility is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
