 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05179 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2014, and requested an 
administrative determination. On January 15, 2015, Department Counsel converted the 
case to a hearing before an administrative judge.1 The case was assigned to me on 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12. 
 
 
2 
 
February 3, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on February 18, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
March 3, 2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the hearing. 
The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant 
submitted AE A through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.f – 1.h and 1.q. He denied 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.e and 1.i – 1.p. These admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since September 2009. He provides information technology support. He 
graduated from high school and has taken some college courses. He spent 11 years in 
the Air Force, separating in 2009 with an honorable discharge. He is married, but has 
been separated from his wife since 2003. He has one child from this marriage and 
another child from a different relationship. He is obligated to pay child support for both 
children as they reside with their mothers. He pays $636 monthly for both children.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts and Applicant’s three dismissed Chapter 
13 bankruptcy cases. The total debt is in excess of $26,000. The debts were listed in 
credit reports from December 2011 and December 2013.3  
 
 Applicant had financial problems when he was in the Air Force and he filed for 
bankruptcy protection under Chapter 13 three times from 2003 through 2005. His 
financial problems increased when he separated from the Air Force in early 2009. He 
was initially unemployed (March to September 2009) then gained part-time employment 
(September to November 2009) with his current employer. He was receiving 
unemployment at the time, but became delinquent on his child support obligations. He 
became a full-time employee in November 2009. The status of the SOR-related debts is 
as follows:4    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a (medical account-judgment $1,017); 1.c (medical account–judgment 
$1,017; 1.d (judgement $1,017): 
 
 These judgments appear to be duplicative, since they were all filed at the same 
time (September 2010) in three different state district courts for the same amount. I find 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 21-22, 24, 25, 49-50; GE 1, 4. 
 
3 GE 2-3. 
 
4 Tr. at 22, 45; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
for the Applicant on two duplicate judgments. Applicant stated that he contacted the 
court and the court indicated the judgment was satisfied, but because the judgment was 
so dated there was no record that could be sent to him. He failed to provide 
documentation to support his assertion of payment.  The most recent credit report in the 
record shows the judgment is still unsatisfied. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (medical account-judgment $979): 
 
 Applicant stated that he contacted the court and the court indicated the judgment 
was satisfied, but because the judgment was so dated there was no record that could 
be sent to him. He failed to provide documentation to support his assertion of payment. 
The most recent credit report in the record shows the judgment is still unsatisfied. This 
debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (judgment $1,485): 
 
 Applicant stated that he contacted the court and the court indicated the judgment 
was satisfied, but because the judgment was so dated there was no record that could 
be sent to him. A credit report in the record shows the judgment is satisfied. This debt is 
resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (education debt $2,928): 
 
 The last action on this student loan account was in March 2009. Applicant 
proposed a payment plan to the creditor (school) on a current balance of $3,724 in 
which he agreed to pay $100 monthly at 12% interest until the debt is paid. The school 
has yet to agree to the plan. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (education debt $3,715): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in June 2011. Applicant claims he 
turned this account over to a debt relief company (DRC) for payment. He further claims 
he has paid the DRC for the last four months. He failed to produce documentation of the 
DRC’s terms or proof of payment. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22; GE 3; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 22; GE 3; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 22; GE 2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 22; GE 2, 3; AE A, C. 
 
9 Tr. at 34-35; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h (telecommunications debt $448): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in September 2013. Applicant 
claims he turned this account over to the DRC for payment. He further claims he has 
paid the DRC for the last four months. He failed to produce documentation of the DRC’s 
terms or proof of payment. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i – 1.k (three dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 2003 - 2005): 
 
 His first Chapter 13 was filed in December 2003. Both he and his wife were 
supposed to each contribute $350 monthly toward the payment of the plan. He claims 
that only he made the required payments and as a result the bankruptcy was dismissed 
in September 2004 for failure to make plan payments. He immediately refiled a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy in his name alone. A plan was established requiring him to make monthly 
payments of $600. It was dismissed after a few months when it was discovered he 
failed to file his 2002 and 2003 tax returns. After filing his returns, he once again refiled 
a Chapter 13 case. This bankruptcy was dismissed in August 2008 because he could 
not get his wife to cooperate in signing some documents.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l (education debt $7,573): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in December 2009. Applicant 
stated he is disputing this debt. He stated he called the education institution a few times 
about the debt. He failed to produce documentation showing the nature of his dispute 
over the debt. This debt is unresolved.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m (education debt $3,715): 
 
 This debt is duplicative with the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. I find for the Applicant 
on this debt.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n (telecommunications debt $591): 
 
 A credit report shows the date of the last action on this account was September 
2011. Applicant claims he paid this debt, but he provided no supporting documentation. 
This debt is unresolved.14 
 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 34-35; GE 3. 
 
11 Tr. at 45; GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. at 36-38; GE 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 38; GE 2, 3. 
 
14 Tr. at 39; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.o – 1.p (child support debt $983 and $1,043): 
 
 Applicant admitted he got behind on his child support, but he believes he is 
caught up. He provided documents showing that his current monthly child support 
payment is $323 for one child and $313 for the second child. The document also 
indicates greater monthly amounts ($486 and $467) are owed. It does not state if these 
larger amounts are for back child support or some other reason. The document also 
does not state whether the amounts relate to any of the SOR allegations. These debts 
are unresolved.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q (consumer debt $172): 
 
 Applicant’s last action on this collection account was in February 2009. At the 
hearing, Applicant claimed this debt was to be paid by the DRC. He did not supply any 
documentation about the DRC’s plan. He then claimed he contacted the creditor post-
hearing and was told he does not owe the debt. He did not support his assertion with 
documentation. This debt is unresolved.16 
 
 According to his personal financial statement completed in April 2014, Applicant 
listed his net monthly income as $2,274 and his expenses and obligations as $2,050. 
This total left him with a remainder of $224. He also indicated in April 2014 that he 
would act on the debts. His testimony at hearing revealed that he has not filed his 2010 
or 2011 federal tax returns.17 When he was asked why he has not filed, he replied that 
he did not have a reason. He has not received any financial counseling.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 40; GE 2; AE B. 
 
16 Tr. at 40; GE 2; AE A. 
 
17 Since there are no SOR allegations concerning his failure to file his federal tax returns, I will 
only consider this evidence as it might relate to the application of mitigating factors and the whole-person 
analysis. 
 
18 Tr. at 47-48; GE 4. 
 
 
6 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had 11 non-duplicate delinquent debts and three dismissed Chapter 13 
bankruptcies. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his inaction on them after 
becoming aware of their existence shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s unemployment (for a short period) and underemployment after he left 
the Air Force can be considered a condition beyond his control. He has done little, if 
anything to address the debt. He claims to have turned over several of the debts to a 
DRC, yet he failed to supply documentation showing the terms of their arrangement or 
proof of payment. He is making regular monthly child support payments, but it is 
unknown whether back payments are owed. Overall the record evidence does not 
support that Applicant’s action were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Given the unpaid status of the 
SOR debts and his history of dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcies, there are not clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Although he paid one 
debt, evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking. AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply and ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant failed to supply documentary evidence to support his dispute of certain 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. However, as stated earlier, there are three debts that 
I found duplicative with other debts. Those will be found in favor of Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and the circumstances by which he 
became indebted. However, I also considered that he has made little effort to resolve 
his financial situation and provided no documentation of his efforts. His indifferent 
attitude toward his financial responsibilities is evident by his nonpayment of his debts 
and his failure to file his federal tax returns. He has not established a meaningful track 
record of debt management, which causes me to question his ability to resolve his 
debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c – 1.e:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.f – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.n – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
