KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C; Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant is a citizen and resident of Canada.  Applicant participates in or has already 
benefitted from the following Canadian government programs: subsidized college education,
health insurance, pension plan, and social insurance.  He has traveled on a Canadian passport,
and has a Canadian driver’s licence.  Applicant’s parents, siblings children and domestic partner
are also citizens and residents of Canada.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-04023.a1
DATE: 04/24/2015
DATE: April 24, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04023
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 28, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline C (Foreign
Preference), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 6, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guidelines F and E
are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
is seeking a security clearance in connection with his employment with a DoD contractor.  He is a
dual citizen of the U.S. and Canada, and he has extensive family connections within that country.
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and child are citizens and residents of Canada, as is his domestic
partner.  Applicant has connections with other Canadian citizens, including the family of his partner
and other members of his own family.  
Applicant has a Canadian bank account with about $5,000 in it.  He has held a Canadian
passport in the past and used it for international travel.  Although he previously stated that he would
probably renew this passport, he testified at the hearing that he saw no need to do so.  Applicant
attended college in Canada, costs of which were subsidized by the Canadian government.
Applicant’s health insurance is provided by a Canadian province; he participates in a Canadian
pension plan and social insurance plan; he pays Canadian taxes, votes in Canadian elections, and
has a Canadian driver’s license.  He and his partner plan to live in Canada at least another five years.
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for professionalism, discretion, reliability, honesty,
trustworthiness, etc.  His numerous character witnesses support his efforts to obtain a clearance.  
The Judge took official notice of facts regarding the relationship between Canada and the
U.S.  Among his extensive findings are the following:  Canada is a democracy that shares a common
border with the U.S.  Canada complies with the rule of law and protects civil liberties.  It is a
member of NATO and is a signatory with the U.S. in several international agreements, including the
North American Free Trade Agreement.  Canada and the U.S. share the world’s most comprehensive
trading relationship, and Canada is the U.S.’s largest foreign investor.  The two countries cooperate
in many ways, including efforts to combat terrorism.
The Judge’s Analysis
3
The Judge cited to his findings about the close relationship between the U.S. and Canada.
He noted, however, that Guideline B concerns are not limited to countries hostile to the U.S.  He
also stated that terrorist groups can often conduct intelligence activities as efficiently as governments
can.  He stated that Applicant’s close ties with numerous family members create a potential conflict
of interest between Applicant’s duty to protect classified information and his sense of obligation to
the connections within Canada.  He concluded that Applicant’s connections within the U.S. “are
insufficient to outweigh his connections to Canada.”  Decision at 14.  He also concluded that
Applicant had “shown a very strong preference for Canada.”  Id. at 15.  
In the whole person analysis, the Judge concluded that the reasons for denying Applicant a
clearance outweighed those for granting one.  He stated that “it cannot be ruled out that at some
future time Canadian entities may seek classified or sensitive information from Applicant.”  Id. at
19.  He noted Applicant’s character witnesses, who described him as trustworthy, reliable, honest,
etc.  However, he also noted evidence of Applicant’s preference for Canada in many important ways,
including payment of Canadian taxes and plans to remain in Canada for several years.
Discussion   
Applicant argues that he is not susceptible to foreign influence or preference.  Among other
things, he cites to his testimony that he had moved to Canada because his ex-wife was not willing
to live in the U.S.  We construe this as an argument that his case does not raise security concerns
under Guidelines B and C.  The Directive presumes a nexus between admitted or proven conduct
under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s worthiness for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-10404 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2015).  Applicant’s extensive contacts within Canada, along with
his dual citizenship and exercise of various prerogatives of Canadian citizenship, support the Judge’s
conclusion that his circumstances raise Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference concerns. 
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, such as his good character and his service to the
Defense industry.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s good character and professional
qualities, discussing this evidence in his analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that
the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-09118 at 2 (App.
Bd. Mar. 25, 2015).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Guideline B recognizes that foreign contacts can raise a concern that the individual may
be “induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the
U.S. interests.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 6.  Guideline C states that an individual who “acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country . . . may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the [U.S.]”  Neither of the Guidelines are limited
to countries that are hostile to the U.S.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22,
2005); ADP Case 07-14939 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 2009).  Nor are they limited to concerns about
acts undertaken by the foreign government itself.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd.
May 23, 2007).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
4
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
