 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04813 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On November 26, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on December 26, 2013.2 On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (SF 86), dated July 13, 2010. 
 
2
 Item 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated December 26, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. In a sworn statement, dated 
August 8, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on February 
25, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on March 3, 2015. He submitted a response on March 20, 
2015. The case was assigned to me April 3, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the factual allegations 
pertaining to criminal conduct and personal conduct in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a.-1.c., 2.a., and 
2.b.), adding explanations for his actions. He failed to address SOR ¶ 2.c. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a designer with his current employer since February 2000.3 A June 1999 
high school graduate, Applicant attended a local community college for approximately 
six months, but did not receive a degree.4 Applicant has never served in the U.S. 
military.5 He has never been married,6 but does have three children: twin daughters 
born in 2001 and a son born in 2002.7 Applicant was granted a secret clearance in 
November 2010.8 
 
                                                          
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
4
 Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 20, 2012), at 1; Item 4, supra note 1, at 13-14. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 22. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 24-26; Item 5, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
8
 Item 7 (Joint Adjudication Management System (JAMS)) Person Summary, downloaded January 22, 
2015). 
 
3 
                                      
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant has a brief history of criminal conduct that commenced in March 2008 
and continued through December 2010. He attributed that conduct, in part, to his 
temper, to being in a volatile relationship with a former girlfriend, to personal judgment 
that was not the best, and to being in the wrong place at the wrong time.9 He might 
have added poor anger management and disregard of police officer directions. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.):  In March 2008, Applicant was driving his girlfriend’s car while she 
was scrolling through his cell phone. She found telephone numbers for other women, 
and an argument ensued. Applicant stopped the car, got out, and began walking 
through an apartment complex towards his cousin’s apartment. At about the same time, 
the police were in the complex responding to a burglary call. Applicant was observed 
walking in the area and the police ordered him to stay where he was. Applicant ignored 
the order and kept walking. When he was eventually stopped, he refused to respond to 
their questions pertaining to the burglary.  
 
Despite his not matching the description of the purported burglar,10 Applicant was 
arrested and charged with breaking and entering the dwelling house of another in the 
nighttime with intent to commit a felony or any larceny therein – burglary - a class 3 
felony; and obstructing justice without force, a class 1 misdemeanor.11  The burglary 
charge was subsequently dismissed and the charged was amended to trespass after 
having been forbidden to do so, a class 1 misdemeanor.12 On July 30, 2008, Applicant 
pled guilty to the remaining charges in order to get the matter behind him, and he was 
sentenced to 12 months in jail (suspended), unsupervised probation for two years, and 
fined $71.13 Applicant denied ever being involved in the burglary, and he felt that he was 
simply in the wrong place at the wrong time.14 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b.):  In November 2008, Applicant and the same girlfriend engaged in 
another verbal dispute after she again went through his cell phone and discovered the 
telephone numbers of other women. The verbal dispute turned physical. Applicant 
contends he pushed his girlfriend into a television that fell and broke, but she reported 
that Applicant had kicked the television screen.15 He departed, taking her car keys with 
him. Applicant’s girlfriend filed a complaint against him. 
 
                                                          
9
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 8, 2014), at 3; Item 5, supra note 4, at 4; Item 4, 
supra note 1, at 36. 
 
10
 Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 8, 2010). 
 
11
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 3; Item 8 (Criminal Case Details, downloaded November 26, 2013), at D3-D4. 
 
12
 Item 8, supra note 11, at D3; Item 5, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
13
 Item 8, supra note 11, at D3-D4; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 6, 2010). 
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
15 Item 5, supra note 4, at 3-4; Item 9 (Incident/Investigation Report, dated December 9, 2013), at 4. 
 
4 
                                      
 
After he turned himself into the authorities, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with trespass after having been forbidden to do so, a class 1 misdemeanor; petit 
larceny, a class 1 misdemeanor; and damaging property, a misdemeanor. On 
December 10, 2008, the charges were dismissed, and Applicant was ordered to pay 
$91 in costs.16 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): In December 2010, Applicant was driving his cousin to an unknown 
friend’s home when they were stopped by the police for having a broken brake light.  
Five or six police cars were involved in the stop. It was later learned that a confidential 
informant had reported that a large quantity of cocaine was being delivered to the 
house, and the police were under the impression that Applicant and his cousin were 
making the delivery. As the police approached the vehicle, Applicant’s cousin fled, but 
was later caught by the police. Applicant exited the vehicle and, because he was 
nervous about all the police at the scene, he too started to walk away. A police search 
of the vehicle and both individuals came up negative. However, a search of a trash can 
near where Applicant was standing, came up with two grams of cocaine.17  
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with unlawful possession of controlled 
substances – cocaine, a class 5 felony.18  In June 2011, Applicant was tried, judgment 
was deferred for one year, and Applicant was placed in the first offender program. He 
was required to visit his probation officer, submit to random urinalysis, and complete 
100 hours of community service. His six urinalyses were negative.19 On June 29, 2012, 
the charge was dismissed, and Applicant paid $545 in costs.20 Applicant denied ever 
being involved in the purchase, sale, possession, or distribution of any illegal drugs. He 
no longer associates with his cousin or with anyone who uses drugs. He believes this 
cocaine incident occurred because he was simply in the wrong place at the wrong 
time.21 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.): Following Applicant’s December 2010 arrest and felony charge, he 
failed to report the incident to his employer in violation of the employer’s security policy. 
As a result, the employer issued Applicant a Final Written Warning, noting that Applicant 
had held a security clearance for several years and had completed annual security 
training each year where the topics of adverse information and employee responsibility 
                                                          
16
 Item 8, supra note 11, at D5-D7; Item 5, supra note 4, at 4. 
 
17
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 2; Item 8, supra note 11, at D8. 
 
19
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
20
 Item 8, supra note 11, at D9. 
 
21
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 3. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
were covered.22 Applicant stated that he did not report the incident to his employer 
because the charge would eventually be dismissed.23 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.): On July 13, 2010, when Applicant completed and submitted his SF 
86, he responded to a question set forth therein. The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose complete information in response to the following police record 
question: § 22c - Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense?24 Applicant 
answered “no.”25 Despite his answer to that question, Applicant did report that he had 
been arrested and charged in March 2008 with trespassing and obstructing justice, and 
in November 2008 with grand larceny and destruction of property.26 Applicant 
mischaracterized his petit larceny charge as a grand larceny, and in the state, grand 
larceny is a felony. He did not refer to the March 2008 burglary charge, the only actual 
felony charge he was ever faced with. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the 
material facts and contended that his failure to list the burglary felony was merely an 
honest mistake. He contended he misinterpreted the question and assumed it stated 
“have you ever been convicted.”27  
 
Applicant acknowledged making mistakes in the past and being in situations in 
which his personal judgment was not the best. He is not proud of his actions, and he 
has made efforts to remove himself from all volatile situations that could negatively 
impact him. He ended the relationship he had with his former girlfriend. He has worked 
diligently to remain active in his community, and currently mentors young children and 
their families in helping them learn how to express their thoughts and feelings through 
safe avenues such as organized sports. He accepts full responsibility for his actions.28 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”29 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
22
 Item 6 (Final Written Warning, dated October 31, 2011).  
 
23
 Item 5, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
24
 The SOR allegation is confusing for it mixed up two questions in the SF 86. The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. 
identified the question in § 22e, but quoted the actual question from § 22c. 
 
25
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
26
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 35-36. 
 
27
 Item 3, supra note 9, at 3; Item 5, supra note 2, at I14. 
  
28
 Item 3, supra note 9, at 3-4: Applicant’s Response to the FORM, dated March 20, 2015, at 1-2. 
 
29
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”30   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”31 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.32  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”33 
                                                          
30
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
31
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
32
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
33
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
7 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”34 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. As noted above, Applicant has a brief history of 
criminal conduct that commenced in March 2008 and continued through December 
2010. During that period he was charged with burglary, a class 3 felony (dismissed); 
obstructing justice, a class 1 misdemeanor; two counts of trespass after having been 
forbidden to do so, class 1 misdemeanors; petit larceny, a class 1 misdemeanor; 
damaging property, a misdemeanor; and unlawful possession of controlled substances 
– cocaine, a class 5 felony (dismissed). AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation: including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
34
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. Applicant’s brief history of criminal conduct, which 
commenced in March 2008, ceased in December 2010. That conduct can be attributed, 
in part, to: his temper, poor anger management, being in a volatile relationship with a 
former girlfriend, personal judgment that was not the best, disregard of police officer 
directions, and being in the wrong place at the wrong time. Two of the incidents 
occurred under very unusual circumstances. The arrest in March 2008 arose even 
though Applicant did not meet the description of the purported burglar. The December 
2010 arrest occurred when Applicant was stopped by five or six police cars because 
Applicant had a broken brake light and was suspected, as reported by a confidential 
informant, of intending to make a large cocaine delivery. A search of the vehicle, as well 
as of Applicant and his cousin, failed to find any cocaine. A search of a trash can near 
where Applicant was standing did find two grams of cocaine.  
 
Over four years have elapsed since Applicant’s most recent criminal behavior 
occurred. Since then, Applicant has taken steps to minimize the probability of 
recurrence by disassociating himself from his volatile relationship with his former 
girlfriend, as well as his relationship with his cousin. With the exception of his failure to 
report the conviction for drug possession to his employer, Applicant has maintained a 
good employment record, and he is constructively involved in his community. 
Applicant’s acceptance of responsibility for his past misconduct, his acknowledgment of 
his shortcomings, and the subsequent period without recurrence of criminal conduct are 
all viewed in Applicant’s favor, and furnish evidence of successful rehabilitation. 
Applicant’s two and one-half years of criminal conduct have been followed by nearly 
four and one-half years without recurrence of criminal activity, which is sufficient to 
conclude that such conduct will not recur. There are no longer doubts as to Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Also, “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
 
9 
                                      
 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . ,” may raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(e). Applicant was charged with burglary (dismissed); 
obstructing justice; two counts of trespass after having been forbidden to do so; petit 
larceny; damaging property; and unlawful possession of controlled substances – 
cocaine (dismissed). Applicant’s omission, concealment, and purported falsification of 
critical information pertaining to his 2008 felony arrest on his 2010 SF 86, as well as his 
failure to inform his employer of his 2010 drug arrest, provide sufficient evidence to 
examine if his omission pertaining to the SF 86 was a deliberate falsification or was the 
result of simple oversight or negligence on his part, and if his failure to report his 2010 
arrest was a deliberate concealment by Applicant.35  
 
As noted above, although Applicant had been previously briefed on the 
organization’s security policy, he failed to comply with the requirement that any “adverse 
information” be reported. When offered the opportunity to explain his failure, Applicant 
stated he did not report the December 2010 arrest to his employer because the charge 
would eventually be dismissed. In fact, one year later the charge was dismissed. 
Nevertheless, in failing to report the incident to his employer, Applicant did violate his 
employer’s security policy. His failure was deliberate.  
 
Applicant’s omission, concealment, and purported falsification of critical 
information pertaining to his 2008 felony arrest on his 2010 SF 86, is not as clear-cut. 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete information in 
response to the following question: Have you EVER been charged with any felony 
offense? Appellant answered “no.” Despite his answer to that question, Applicant did 
report that he had been arrested and charged in March 2008 with trespassing and 
obstructing justice, and in November 2008 with grand larceny and destruction of 
property. Applicant mischaracterized his petit larceny charge as a grand larceny, and in 
the state, grand larceny is a felony. He did not refer to the March 2008 burglary charge, 
the only actual felony charge he was ever faced with, because he was not convicted of 
the charge. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the material facts and contended 
that his failure to list the burglary felony was merely an honest mistake. He contended 
he misinterpreted the question and assumed it stated “have you ever been convicted.” 
Applicant is not trained in the law, and the significant differences between a 
misdemeanor and a felony are not explained in the SF 86. Applicant’s confusion 
regarding a charge and a conviction, and his misinterpretation of the question, under 
these circumstances, effectively rebut the conclusion that he deliberately falsified his 
                                                          
35
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)).  
 
 
10 
                                      
 
response to the question. AG ¶ 16(e) has been established, but AG ¶ 16(a) has not 
been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 17(d), 
personal conduct concerns may also be mitigated where “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.” In addition, where “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) apply. Applicant’s two and one-half years involving 
three incidents of criminal conduct, two of which occurred under very unique or unusual 
circumstances, have been followed by nearly four and one-half years without recurrence 
of criminal activity. Since then, Applicant has taken steps to minimize the probability of 
recurrence by disassociating himself from his former girlfriend and his cousin. With the 
exception of his failure to report the arrest for drug possession to his employer, 
Applicant has maintained a good employment record, and he is constructively involved 
in his community. Applicant’s acceptance of responsibility for his past misconduct, his 
acknowledgment of his shortcomings, and the subsequent period without recurrence of 
criminal conduct are all viewed in Applicant’s favor, and furnish evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. Applicant acknowledged making mistakes in the past and he is not proud 
of his actions. There are no longer doubts as to Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
 
11 
                                      
 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.36       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s brief 
history of criminal conduct, which commenced in March 2008, ceased in December 
2010. His temper, poor anger management, being in a volatile relationship with a former 
girlfriend, personal judgment that was not the best, disregard of police officer directions, 
and being in the wrong place at the wrong time, all contributed to his arrests. Applicant’s 
activities resulted in his being convicted and sentenced on two of three occasions. He 
also failed to comply with his employer’s security policy. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. It is 
true that Applicant has a history of criminal activity, including the two convictions, and 
the one incident that was ultimately dismissed. However, over four years have elapsed 
since Applicant’s most recent criminal behavior occurred. Since then, he has taken 
substantial steps to minimize the probability of recurrence. He is constructively involved 
in his community. Applicant’s acceptance of responsibility for his past misconduct, his 
acknowledgment of his shortcomings, and the subsequent period without recurrence of 
criminal conduct are all indications of successful rehabilitation. There are no longer 
doubts as to Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:    For Applicant 
       
  
                                                          
36
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
