1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-01262
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2015.  A notice of
hearing was issued on February 2, 2015, scheduling the case for March 26, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified and presented two documents for the record (AX A-B). I kept the record open
for a submission. Applicant did not submit any documents. The transcript was received
on April 3, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Applicant stated that he held a top secret clearance with another agency.      1
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations under Guideline
F, with the exception of ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant explained that the other accounts
alleged were paid.
Applicant is 30 years old. He graduated from high school in 2003. He is a
telecommunications specialist. Applicant and his wife separated in 2005, and they
divorced in 2013. He has two children from his first marriage. He remarried in late 2013.
Applicant has been with his current employer since May 2011. This is Applicant’s first
request for a security clearance with the DOD . (GX 1)1
 The SOR alleges delinquent debts, including medical accounts, collection
accounts, and a car repossession totaling about $23,000. 
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant admitted that he owed this debt in the
amount of $171. He notes that he paid the account, but it is still on his credit report. He
believes he paid the account last year. (Tr. 23) Applicant does not have any
documentation to support his claim. He argues that it does not appear on his current
credit report. (Tr. 59)
As to the SOR allegation 1.b, Applicant admitted the debt in the amount of
$1,263, and acknowledged that it was not paid. (Tr. 24) As to SOR allegations 1.c
through 1.g, Applicant denied them because he stated that he paid them last March.
(Tr. 24) Applicant stated that he attached information and documentation to his answer.
There was no documentation in the record. (Tr. 26)
As to the SOR allegation 1.h, Applicant disputes this debt in the amount of $736.
He reported to the police that his ex-wife obtained a credit card in his name. He claims
that he has never had an account with the particular credit card company. (Tr. 27) It is
still on an older credit report but not his most recent one. (GX 4)
Applicant denied he owed the remaining accounts because he stated that he
paid them in March 2014. He had no documentation to support his position. (Tr. 30)
Applicant stated that when he received his tax refund in March 2014, he paid his
delinquent debts.  (Tr. 33) Applicant stated that he did not have any documentation
because he has moved and did not keep copies. (Tr. 52) Applicant testified that he
would attempt to obtain documentation from his debit account, but he did not submit
additional information. (Tr. 52)
Applicant explained that the allegation in SOR 1.l is for the 2011 car
repossession. He missed payments for a time but since September 2010, he has made
monthly payments. (Tr.14) He stated that he paid $,2000 to have the car returned to
3
him. His credit report shows a balance of $11,040 down from $15,000. (AX B) His
monthly payments are $500. (Tr. 32)
Applicant incurred financial difficulties as a result of his divorce. He inherited a
great deal of debt from the marriage. He was candid that he bought anything that his
wife wanted. She did not work and he paid the bills. He also noted that when the
government shut down in 2013, for 17 days he could not pay his bills. (Tr. 13)  He noted
unemployment from February to May 2011. (Tr. 46) Applicant has  paid child support
for his two children from his first marriage. 
Applicant’s current position is stable. He earns $56,000 a year. He submitted a
note from his employer for good work performance. (AX A) His wife also works, and he
believes that she earns about $67,000. They share expenses. He pays child support for
his two children.  Applicant is current with all his expenses.  (Tr. 31) He uses a budget.
Applicant’s net monthly remainder is about $350. He acknowledged that he has a credit
card that is currently at its maximum. (Tr. 63)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
5
Applicant had delinquent debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
Applicant incurred delinquent debt after a separation and divorce. He also
referred to the government shut down in 2013 that affected his income. He still has
unresolved debt despite steady employment. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies.  As noted above, Applicant’s financial difficulties are a combination of
separation and divorce. However, it is not clear that he acted responsibly. He is making
car payments on the vehicle that was repossessed. This partially applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has limited application. Applicant states that the
majority of the delinquent debts are paid. However, he has not provided any
documentation to support his claim.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
6
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 30 years old. He provides for his family. He has a favorable
recommendation from his employer. 
Applicant states that the majority of his financial difficulties stem from his
separation and divorce. He notes that he paid the majority of the delinquent debts on
the SOR, but he provided no documentation. It does appear that he is making
payments on the car, which was originally repossesed. Any doubts must be resolved in
favor of the Government. Without any documentary evidence, Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. He has not
met his burden of proof. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m-n: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
