                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-04860           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On November 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 24, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 29, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 23, 2015. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-
2). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and two exhibits (AEs A-B). The transcript
(Tr.) was received on March 3, 2015.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit her the opportunity to provide evidence of job promotions, a Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition, a personnel action notice from her employer, and a character reference. For
good cause shown, Applicant was granted four days to supplement the record. The
Government was afforded one day to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant
submitted documentation of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, a personnel action notice
from her employer, and a character reference. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were
admitted as AEs C-E.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 25 delinquent debts
exceeding $27,000.  In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the debts.
She claimed she completed a payment plan with a debt consolidation firm and pays $420
a month to each of the listed creditors. She claimed she has learned valuable lessons
about the importance of responsible management of her finances and has every intent of
paying all of her creditors.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old member of a security police/EMTunit for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. Since December 2014, she has been  on
administrative leave without pay. (Tr. 35, 64, 69) The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in July 2008 and separated in January 2013. (GE 1; Tr. 34-35,
56) She filed for divorce in the wrong county and is currently preparing to refile in the
county where her husband resides. (Tr. 51) At this time, she is still legally married. (Tr.
51) She has one child (age six) from this marriage and receives no child support from  her
husband since their separation. (Tr. 35) Applicant claims no college credits. 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve in September 2003. (GE 1; Tr. 30)
She transferred to the Army National Guard of her state in December 2007 and served
four years in the Active Reserve. (GE 1; Tr. 30-31) In January 2011, she transferred back
to the Active U.S. Army Reserve. (Tr. 31-34) She has remained in good standing with her
3
Reserve commitments throughout her 12 years of service. (Tr. 32) She has held a
security clearance since September 2003.
Applicant’s finances
In 2012, Applicant underwent surgery for the removal of a tumor and incurred
medical bills that were not covered by her health insurance. (Tr. 36-37) Between 2012
and 2013, Applicant accumulated 25 delinquent debts exceeding $27,000. 
Many of Applicant’s listed debts in the SOR are delinquent medical debts. One of
the debts (creditor 1.j) represents a large deficiency balance on a vehicle repossession.
(GE 2; Tr. 38) The creditor she contacted could not identify the debt, and she has been
unable to obtain any account information from this creditor. (Tr. 59-61) Another debt
(creditor 1.l) represents a debt arising from an apartment she vacated. (GE 2) 
After receiving the SOR in November 2014, Applicant contacted each of her
creditors to explore payment plans and was successful in working out credit plans with
those creditors who could identify her accounts. (Tr. 54) With her limited income, she
made payment arrangements for $10 to $20 a month. (Tr. 54) Once she was placed on
administrative leave, she could no longer keep up with her payments. (Tr. 54) 
Before she was placed on administrative leave, Applicant netted approximately
$3,600 a month from her full-time security position. (Tr. 70) Since she was placed on
administrative leave in December 2014, Applicant received some unemployment benefits
for the month of December, bi-weekly net earnings of $575 from a part-time position with
another firm, and $250 to $300 a month from her weekend Reserve duties. (Tr. 71-72)  
In January 2015, Applicant contacted a debt repayment firm at the suggestion of a
co-worker. (AE A; Tr. 53) After consulting with her bankruptcy attorneys, she and her
attorneys settled on petitioning for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief as the best course of
action for her. (AEs A-B; Tr. 42-43)  
In March 2015, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. (AE C) In her
petition, she scheduled assets totaling $5,327, unsecured priority claims of $1,000 (i.e.,
an outstanding state tax obligation), and unsecured non-priority claims totaling $30,193.
(AE C)  She expects to receive a discharge within the ensuing six months. (AE C)
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by her Army Reserve unit administrator. (AE D) She
extolled her self-motivation, dependability, and high standards she has maintained over
several years as an Army reservist. (AE E) She described Applicant as honest and fair
and a superb team player, who volunteers for additional duties. 
A Government official who has worked closely with Applicant credited her with
ensuring that officers under her supervision were always timely with training information
4
pertaining to their work. (AE E) This Government official lauded Applicant’s work ethic
and capable supervisory responsibilities. (AE E)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
5
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of delinquent debts (mostly
medical-related), attributable to income deficits following her separation and heavy
medical debts following her 2012 surgery. Applicant’s actions warrant the application of
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
6
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant has since addressed her accumulated debts with a debt repayment
firm. Based on the advice of her attorneys, she petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
relief in March 2015. She hopes to obtain her discharge within six months and is
committed to restoring her finances to stable condition. 
Applicant’s past financial problems for the most part were beyond her control.
Surgery, legal separation, the lack of child support, and work suspension without pay all
played a major role in her accumulations of delinquent debts between 2012 and 2013.
Applicant’s multitude of extenuating circumstances and recent mitigation efforts merit
application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s pre-bankruptcy initiatives to work out payment plans with her
creditors and documented bankruptcy petition reflect positive efforts on her part to
resolve her debts through legally afforded means in accordance with the criteria
established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify her poor
financial condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR
Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).  Applicant’s bankruptcy petition and
favorable prospects for obtaining a discharge within six months enable her to meet the
Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing her finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482
(App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12,
2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant documents a meritorious record of
civilian employment with her Army Reserve unit and with her defense contractor before
her work suspension in December 2014. She has impressive support from her Army
Reserve unit administrator and Government official familiar with her work. 
Addressing her finances, Applicant has taken significant measures to resolve her
debts through bankruptcy. She is committed to maintaining her finances at respectable
levels consistent with holding a security clearance.  
Applicant’s documented payment initiatives are significant and reflect a serious
commitment to restore her credit and stabilize her finances. Overall, Applicant’s
corrective actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
7
guideline governing her finances. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
the allegations covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.y:                                        For Applicant                
      
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
