                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01920
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
History of the Case
On July 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudicative
facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR in August 2014 and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on October 31, 2014 and scheduled for hearing on November
2
12, 2014. A hearing was heard on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or
revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of
two exhibits (GEs 1-2). Applicant relied on one exhibit and one witness (himself). The
transcript (Tr.) was received on November  24, 2014.  
Besides its identified exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
facts covered by five source documents. Included are the following documents: Country
Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 5-Safe Terrorist Safe Havens (Update to 7120
Report), U.S. Department of State (April 2014); Country Reports on Terrorism 2013,
Chapter 2 - Country Reports: South and Central Asia Overview, U.S. Department of State
(April 2014); Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the Killing of Osama bin
Laden, the White House Office of the Press Secretary (May 2011); Travel Warning,
Pakistan, U.S. Department of State (August 2014); Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 2013, U.S. Department of State (undated).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292, at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12,
2007).  Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that
are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-identified background reports containing facts pertaining to the geopolitical situation
in Pakistan. Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent
with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant
from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing Pakistan and the UAE. Without objection from either of the parties, I also took
official notice of a Background Note on Pakistan, U.S. Department of State (October
2010) on April 14, 2015. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, the Government requested the record be kept open
to afford it the opportunity to supplement the record with background records covering the
United Arab Emirates. (UAE) For good cause shown, the Government was granted five
days to supplement the record. Applicant was afforded three days to respond. Within the
time permitted, the Government supplemented the record with a document entitled Quick
Facts: United Arab Emirates (October 2014). The Government’s submission was admitted
as GE 3.
Prior to the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with endorsements and background
records covering Pakistan and the UAE. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
five days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded 12 days to respond.  
Within the time permitted, Applicant furnished documentation of U.S. Relations with
Pakistan, a U.S. State Department press release covering Secretary of State John Kerry’s
3
Remarks at the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue, and an undated background report
covering the UAE.  Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AE’s C-E. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has a father and mother-in-law who are
citizens and residents of Pakistan. Allegedly, he has a half-brother who is a citizen of
Pakistan and resident of the UAE. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of
the allegations of the SOR.  He added no explanations.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old technical lead for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Pakistan. (GE 1) He attended high school and
college in the country and immigrated to the United States in 1979. (GE 1; Tr. 43-44) He
earned a bachelor’s of science degree in engineering in May 1983, a master’s of science
degree in electrical engineering in December 1986, and a Ph.D in electrical engineering in
1995. (GE 1; Tr. 45).  Each of these degrees was received from recognized universities.
(GE 1; Tr. 45) Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2003. (GE 1)
                                  
Applicant met his wife while attending a U.S. university and married in 1986 in
Pakistan. (GE 1; Tr. 47-48) His wife was born and raised in Pakistan but became a
naturalized U.S. citizen.  (Tr. 48) He has no children from this marriage. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr.
48)
Applicant’s mother passed away in 1963 (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 44) His father and
stepmother are citizens and residents of Pakistan. (GE 1) His father is retired and
previously worked in communications and natural gas. (GE 1; Tr. 53) His stepmother
holds a master’s degree in psychology and taught school before marrying his father. (Tr.
54) She has since been a homemaker. (Tr. 54) Neither his father nor his stepmother
residing in Pakistan have any known affiliations with Pakistan’s government or military.
(GE 2; Tr. 69) 
Applicant maintains contact with his father and stepmother once or twice a month.
(Tr. 58-59) He last traveled to Pakistan in the summer of 2014 to see his family members.
(Tr. 51-52)  His father and stepmother, in turn, visited Applicant and his wife in the United
States in October 2014. (Tr.  49)
Applicant has a half-brother who is a citizen of Pakistan and resident of the UAE.
(GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 54-55)  His half-brother is married and has a daughter who also resides
in the UAE. This half-brother works as a director of investments for a British firm and
makes frequent trips to Pakistan. (Tr. 58) Applicant last saw his half-brother in summer
2014, and maintains contact with him every four months. (Tr. 58) His half-brother has no
4
known affiliations with either the Pakistani government or the UAE government and no
prior military service with the Pakistan government. (Tr. 69)
Besides his half-brother, Applicant has two sisters. One passed away and the other
resides in Canada. (GEs 1 and 2: Tr. 50, 59, 62) 
Applicant’s wife’s parents are both deceased. (GE 1; Tr. 53) She has a sister who
is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. This sister has two daughters who reside with her
and have Pakistani citizenship. Applicant’s wife traveled to Pakistan in 2012 and has
property in Pakistan that she inherited from her deceased parents. Applicant’s wife
maintains daily contact with her sister in Pakistan. (Tr. 61) 
Applicant currently grosses approximately $144,000 a year from his employer. (Tr.
72) He provides no financial support to his parents or his half-brother. (GE 2) None of his
family members have ever received any financial aid from Applicant. Applicant owns
property in Pakistan that is recorded in his name, his father, and his half-brother.  (Tr. 65-
66) He received income from the property of approximately $2,000 a month from the rents
generated by the property. (Tr. 66-67) Applicant, his father, and half-brother have no long-
term plans to develop or dispose of the property. (Tr. 67-68) Applicant has no bank
accounts or other assets in Pakistan and has no plans to retire in any country but the
United States. (Tr. 72)  
Political and economic background of Pakistan
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic located in Southeast Asia, with a
population of nearly 170 million. See Background Note on Pakistan, supra, at 1.
Pakistan’s government consists of an executive (the president), a prime minister (the
functioning head of government), a bicameral parliament, and a judiciary. (id.) The
judiciary includes a supreme court, provincial high courts, and a federal Islamic (or Sharia)
court. 
Background
Geographically, Pakistan’s government is comprised of West Pakistan and its
provinces of Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, and the Northwest Frontier province and East
Pakistan with its Bengal province. Pakistan became independent on August 14, 1947. See
Background Note on Pakistan, supra. The United States and Pakistan established
diplomatic relations in 1947, following Great Britain’s declaration in June 1947 that it would
bestow full dominion status of two successor states: India and Pakistan.  
Pakistan’s independence proved fragile and rife with political and economic
instability following the death of the country’s first head of state (Muhammad Ali Jinnah) in
1948 and the ensuing assassination of its first prime minister (Liaqat Ali Khan) in 1951.
See Background Note on Pakistan, supra, at 2.  In October 1958, President Iskander Mirza
(with military support) suspended his country’s constitution (adopted just two years before),
imposed martial law, and canceled the scheduled elections. President Mirza’s action
resulted in a military coup, his arrest, and the establishment of a military dictatorship under
the rule of General Mohammad Ayub Khan.
5
Political and economic turmoil followed and new governments were installed over
the next 20 years: some as the result of general elections (such as the Pakistan People’s
Party or PPP which swept Zulfikar Ali Bhutto into power).  It was under Ali Bhutto’s civilian
leadership that Pakistan emerged as a nuclear power in the 1970s.  India’s nuclear test in
1974 injected further uncertainty and concern into Pakistan’s relationship with India, and is
generally credited as the principal impetus behind President Ali Bhutto’s decision to make
Pakistan a nuclear state.  See Background Note on Pakistan, supra.
Political tensions and economic unrest in Pakistan also produced military
interventions before the close of the 20  century. See Background Note on Pakistan,th
supra, at 2-3. Disputed national elections that marred Bhutto’s declared victory in 1977
spurred anti-government unrest and ultimately prompted a military takeover of the Bhutto
government in July 1977 and installation of Army chief of staff, Muhammad Zia ul-Haq) as
the chief martial law administrator. When Zia assumed power, his military government
arrested Bhutto, tried him on conspiracy charges and hanged him in April 1979.  (Id.)
Between 1977 and 1999, Pakistan has experienced a succession of new
governments, some the result of military intervention and some due to the formation of
coalition parties. See Background Note on Pakistan, supra, at 2-3. Following President
Zia’s untimely death in August 1988, the political parties of Benazir Bhutto and Muhammad
Mawaz Sharif competed for the formation of coalition governments to lead Pakistan. Each
party’s efforts were marked with ethnic conflict, fragmentation within their coalitions,
corruption and nepotism, which stoked political tensions, created  gridlock, and contributed
to the deterioration of law and order. (Id., at 3)
Following the ouster of Prime Minister Sharif in October 1999, Pakistan’s military,
led by President Pervez Musharraf, declared a state of emergency and issued the
provisional constitutional order that suspended the federal and provincial parliaments,
placed the constitution in abeyance, and designated Musharraf as chief executive. See
Background Note on Pakistan, supra, at 3-4.  Musharraf’s presidency was extended for five
years by referendum in 2004. After the terrorist attacks on U.S. soil in September 11, 2001,
Pakistan pledged and provided its support to the United States in its coalition efforts to
confront  Al Qaida terrorists and Taliban fugitives.  However, since the successful raid on
the Pakistan compound of Osama bin Laden in May 2011, U.S. relations with Pakistan
have deteriorated and become more difficult to manage. 
Political unrest, human rights,  and travel warnings
Today, anti-American sentiment is widespread among a coalition of Islamic parties
in Pakistan’s parliament. See Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 2 - Country
Reports: South and Central Asia Overview, supra, at 2-3 and Administrative Notice, supra,
at 2. These groups have called for “jihad” against U.S. interests, which they view as a
threat to Pakistan sovereignty.
Pakistan has extensive terrorist networks operating within its borders. Members of
the Taliban are known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Aeas (FATA) of Pakistan,
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and
6
Afghanistan. Taliban senior leaders continue to enjoy safe haven in Pakistan. See Country
Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 5-Safe Terrorist Safe Havens (Update to 7120
Report), supra, at 2-3 and Administrative Notice, supra, at 2-3. The leader of the Taliban,
Mullah Omar, has operated openly in Pakistan.
Besides the Taliban presence, the FATA region in Pakistan continues to be a vital
sanctuary to al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups,
including the Haqqani Network, the Quetta Sura, and Lashkar-e-Tayiba. See Country
Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 5-Safe Terrorist Safe Havens (Update to 7120
Report), supra, and Administrative Notice, supra. Al-Qaida and other Afghan extremist
groups exploit that operating environment to plan and direct operations. (Id.)
Extremist groups operating within Pakistan continue to target Americans and other
western interests, as well as high level Pakistan government officials and members of
minority, indigenous, and religious groups. See Travel Warning, Pakistan, supra, at 2 and
Administrative Notice, supra, at 3. Despite increased efforts by Pakistani security forces, al-
Qaida terrorists, Afghan militants, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to
find safe haven in portions of Pakistan’s FATA, Khyber Paktunkwa, and Baluchistan, and
have operated in those areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United States
and its allies in Afghanistan. See  Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 2 - Country
Reports: South and Central Asia Overview, supra, at 3 and Administrative Notice, supra.
The Haqqani Network, an extremist organization operating as a strategic arm of
Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence Agency, is also operating from Pakistan with
impunity. See  Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, Chapter 2 - Country Reports: South
and Central Asia Overview Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, supra, at 1-2, and
Administrative Notice, supra, at 1-2. This group has staged attacks on Afghan and U.S.
troops in Afghanistan (as well as civilians), including the September 13, 2011 attack on the
U.S. embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan. (id.) On September 7, 2012, the United States
formally declared the Haqqani Network a Foreign Terrorist Network. See Id.
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special forces personnel raided a large al-Qaida compound
located in Pakistan and shot and killed al-Quaida leader Osama bin Laden.  See Press
Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the Killing of Osama bin Laden, supra, at 1. In
announcing bin Laden’s death, senior administration officials characterized him as a
“sworn enemy of the United States and a danger to all humanity; a man who called for the
murder of any American anywhere on Earth,” who designated the United states as al-
Quaida’s “primary target,” and who was responsible for killing thousands of innocent men
and women not only on 9/11, but in the 1998 East Africa embassy bombings, the attack of
the U.S. Cole, and many other acts of brutality. “ (Id., at 1-2) That bin Laden was found in a
residential neighborhood of Pakistan is illustrative of the heightened security concern over
Pakistan’s use as a safe haven for terrorists, militants, and insurgents. (Id., at 3) 
The U.S. Department of State continues to warn U.S. citizens against non-essential
travel to Pakistan (especially in the border regions) out of concern for terrorist threats in the
country. See Travel Warning, Pakistan, supra, at 1-2 and Administrative Notice, supra. In
2011, Pakistan experienced hundreds of bomb blasts, suicide attacks, and  sectarian
violence resulting in the deaths of more than 2,500 civilians and 670 law enforcement
7
personnel. See Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 2 - Country Reports South
and Central Asia Overview, supra, at 12. Attacks targeting civilians and security personnel
occur almost daily across all provinces. (Id.) These included attacks against the U.S.
Consulate in Peshawar, U.S. Government vehicle convoys, and U.S. personnel, and
against Pakistani government authorities. (Travel Warning, Pakistan, supra). Terrorists
have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where Americans are
known to congregate or visit. (id) Fatal bomb attacks have occurred in Islamabad,
Peshawar, Quetta, Lahore, and other Pakistan cities on a regular basis. (id., at 3)  Records
document, too, that several American citizens in Pakistan have been kidnaped. (Id.)
Country reports on Pakistan reveal a poor Pakistani human rights record.  Reported
human rights problems include extrajudicial killings, torture, rape by security forces, lack of
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest and detention, wide-spread corruption,
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in women and
children. See Country Reports on Human Rights Report for 2013: Pakistan, supra, at 1-21.
Additional problems include poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread
government corruption, rape, honor crimes, and widespread trafficking in persons. (id., at
10-13) Military and terrorist operations in all four provinces and in FATA resulted in large
numbers of deaths and injuries. (Id., at 1-2) The Pakistani government also maintains
several domestic intelligence services that monitored politicians, political activists,
suspected terrorists, and the media. (Id.) Credible reports document that Pakistani
authorities routinely used wiretaps and intercepted and opened mail without the requisite
court approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and electronic correspondence. (Id.)  
U.S.-Pakistan bilateral relations
The United States has enjoyed diplomatic relations with Pakistan since the country’s
creation in 1947. See U.S. Relations with Pakistan, supra, at 1. The United States is
Pakistan’s largest trading partner. Bilateral trade between the United states and Pakistan
exceeded $5 billion in 2013, and the United States continues to be one of the principal
sources of direct of direct foreign investment in Pakistan. (Id.) Governance and energy
scarcities continue to limit foreign investment in Pakistan, however, despite the liberalizing
steps Pakistan has taken in recent years to promote trade and investment. In his
welcoming remarks at the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue convened in Washington, D.C.
in January 2014, Secretary Kerry stressed the increased cooperation and strengthening of
ties between the United States and Pakistan across a broad spectrum of areas, stretching
from energy, to security, and to education. See Press Release of Secretary of State John
Kerry’s Remarks at the U.S.-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue, supra. 
United States bilateral assistance to Pakistan has increased in recent years
following Congressional  passage of the Enhanced Partnership with Pakistan Act in 2009.
See U.S. Relations with Pakistan, supra, at 1. Between October 2009 and March 2014, the
United States disbursed over $4.38 billion in civilian assistance to Pakistan and shows no
signs of reducing its assistance levels. See Id. Its assistance packages include
counterintelligence, humanitarian, energy, and agriculture support. (Id.) 
Pakistan and the United States belong to a number of common international
organizations. See U.S. Relations with Pakistan, supra, at 2.  Included organizations are
8
the United Nations, the World trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund, and the
World Bank. (id.) 
UAE political and economic background
The UAE is a federation of seven semiautonomous emirates with a resident
population of approximately 9.2 million. (AE E) The rulers of the seven emirates make up
the Federal Supreme Council, which is the country’s highest legislative and executive body.
(AE E) Significant human rights problems in the UAE included citizen inability to change
their government, limitations of citizens’ civil liberties, arbitrary arrests, incommunicado
detentions, and lengthy pretrial detentions.  Other reported human rights problems in the
UAE included prison guard brutality, limited corruption, the lack of government
transparency, and the absence of judicial independence. (Id.)
Dual citizenship can pose a problem for visitors in the UAE. (GE 3) The UAE’s
government does not recognize dual nationality. Children of UAE fathers automatically
acquire UAE citizenship at birth and must enter the UAE on their UAE passports. (GE 3) In
addition to being subject to all UAE laws, U.S. citizens who also hold UAE citizenship may
also be subject to other laws that impose special obligations on citizens of the UAE.
Despite cited human rights problems and the travel restrictions that impact U.S.
citizens who are dual nationals of the UAE, bilateral relations between the United States
and the UAE remain strong and promise to remain that way for the foreseeable future.
Trade and investment between the two countries have progressed and show considerable
promise  for expansion.  
Endorsements
Applicant provided two endorsements on his behalf.  Both his engineering manager
and program manager credited him with an excellent work ethic. They lauded his help in
mentoring less experienced engineers.  (AEs A and B) 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
9
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure
or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact
or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  (AG
¶ 6)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge
cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
10
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Born and raised in Pakistan, Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1979
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003.  He married his wife in 1986 and has
no children from this marriage. Security concerns focus principally on Applicant’s
father and stepmother, who are citizens and residents of Pakistan and a half-brother
who is a citizen and resident of the UAE.
By virtue of the Pakistani citizenship and residency status of Applicant’s family
members residing in Pakistan (i.e., his father, stepmother, and sister-in-law), and in the
UAE (i.e., his half-brother), the frequent contacts he maintains with them, the common
property he co-owns with them in Pakistan, and the money the property generates,
Applicant manifests close working relationships with his family and an abiding interest
in their welfare. 
Potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition (DC) ¶
7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend,
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence apply to Applicant’s situation. None of
Applicant’s family members residing in Pakistan and the UAE, respectively, have any
affiliations with the governments or military establishments of either Pakistan or the
UAE. Specifically, Applicant’s father is retired, and his stepmother is a homemaker. 
Addressing his wife’s sister residing in Pakistan, she has no known affiliation
with the Pakistan government. And while his wife maintains regular contact with her,
Applicant does not. As a result, DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” has
limited application.  
11
The citizenship and residence status of Applicant’s family members residing in
Pakistan and the UAE imposes some heightened risk because of the political and
economic instability that currently exists in Pakistan. Pakistan’s unsettling political and
economic conditions cannot be fully reconciled with U.S. security interests. This is
much less true of the UAE, where Applicant’s half-brother currently resides, The UAE
enjoys strong bilateral relations with the United States and maintains a stable
government. (GE 3 and AEs C and D)
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens or residents
of foreign countries in general. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one
foreign country may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing
in the supplied materials and country information about Pakistan. Quite clearly, the
geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime operating in Pakistan
does matter. 
Pakistan’s bilateral relations with the United States over the past half-century
have been uneven and sometimes contentious. Pakistan has extensive terrorist
networks operating within its borders. Extremist groups operating within Pakistan
continue to target Americans and other western interests, as well as high level
Pakistan government officials and members of minority, indigenous, and religious
groups. 
Despite increased efforts by Pakistani security forces, al-Qaida terrorists,
Afghan militants, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to find safe
havens in portions of Pakistan’s FATA, Khyber Paktunkwa, and Baluchistan, and have
operated in those areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United States
and its allies in Afghanistan. Still, the United States maintains important bilateral
relations with Pakistan, and the Pakistan government is not known to pursue U.S.
Government information or target its former citizens with that information. 
Like Pakistan, the United States maintains good bilateral relations with the UAE,
a stable country with close trade and investment relations with the United States. The
UAE can be expected to be a close ally of the United States in the Middle East for the
foreseeable future.
Based on his case-specific circumstances, both MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,”
and MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the
U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest,” are applicable. 
12
Applicant has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for over 10 years, holds three
engineering degrees he earned from U.S. universities, and is highly regarded and
trusted by his managers. While he has family members who are citizens and residents
of Pakistan and the UAE, respectively, and modest property interests in Pakistan, none
of these connections pose any heightened risk of a potential hostage situation in either
country. Because Applicant’s property interests in Pakistan represent modest holdings,
he may also take advantage of the mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or
routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they
are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence,
manipulate, or pressure the individual.” 
Documentation of Applicant’s self-reporting of his family contacts in Pakistan is
very limited.  For this reason, MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with
existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country,” has only partial
application. 
Neither MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation,” nor MC ¶ 8(d), “the foreign contacts and activities are on
U.S. Government business or are approved by the cognizant security authority;” apply
to Applicant’s situation. Applicant’s contacts with his father and mother-in-law are
neither casual nor infrequent, and his contacts with them do not involve U.S.
Government business or Government-approved activities. 
Whole-person assessment is available to narrow Applicant’s exposure to
conflicts of interests with his Pakistani family members residing in Pakistan and the
UAE, respectively. In Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion, pressure, or
influence being brought to bear on him and his identified family members in Pakistan
and the UAE, respectively, are manageable ones and create no likelihood of any
coercion or pressure being brought to bear on any of his family members, or Applicant
himself, in the foreseeable future. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with
his father and mother-in-law who reside in Pakistan and his half-brother who resides in
the UAE are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's
ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familial relationships in
Pakistan and the UAE. Neither his own citizenship and residence in the United States
nor those of his family members residing in Pakistan and the UAE, respectively, pose
any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence by Pakistani or UAE authorities or
terrorists. Favorable conclusions warrant, accordingly, with respect to the allegations
covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a-1.c.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
13
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):    FOR APPLICANT                    
                                  
           Subparas. 1.a-1.c:                                    For Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
14
  
