 
1 
 
 
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04607 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 29, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is delinquent on three debts, in the total amount of $27,378. He failed 
to produce documentation to show he has addressed his delinquencies. He has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 22, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 21, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 11, 2015, scheduling the hearing for March 9, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits until April 6, 
2015. On March 23, 2015, he requested an extension until April 20, 2015 to submit post 
hearing evidence. The request for an extension was granted. Applicant failed to submit 
anything further for consideration, and record was closed on April 21, 2015. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 6, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He is employed as a custodian for a Government 
contractor. He is married. He provides support for his two children, ages 26 and 16, and 
his grandchild. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
has made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR alleged 
that Applicant is delinquent on three debts, in the total amount of $27,378. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted to each debt. The alleged debts were also listed on credit 
reports dated January 30, 2014; January 22, 2015; and March 8, 2015. (Answer; GE 2; 
GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to: a reduction in overtime and 
losing “track of stuff.” He also noted the financial delinquencies occurred around the 
time of the birth of a grandchild, but did not explain how the birth related to the 
delinquencies. (Tr. 20-21.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off debt for a repossessed vehicle in the 
amount of $12,301. This debt has been delinquent since June 2009. He explained that 
once he fell behind on his vehicle loan, he worked to repay his delinquent payments 
because he did not want the vehicle repossessed. However, it was repossessed despite 
his efforts to bring the account current. He was approximately two months late on 
payments at the time of repossession. The vehicle was resold for less than he owed on 
the loan, and he still owes the balance. (GE 2; Tr. 21-26, 28.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$6,100. It has been delinquent since January 2009. This debt was for a loan. It has not 
been repaid because Applicant does not have the money. ( GE 2; Tr. 28-29.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to another creditor in the amount of $8,878. It has been 
delinquent since 2007. He does not recall the last time he made payment on this 
delinquency. (GE 2; Tr. 29.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified he lives paycheck to paycheck with only $20 to $30 remaining 
after he pays his monthly bills. He failed to submit evidence of financial counseling, a 
budget, or income statement. He provided no letters of recommendation or performance 
appraisals. (Tr. 32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant remains indebted to three different creditors in the amount of $27,378. 
He demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s substantial delinquent debts are recent and ongoing, without 
indication that the circumstances under which they arose have changed. He therefore 
failed to establish substantial mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant also offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under 
MC 20(b). He attributed his delinquencies to a reduction in overtime and the birth of his 
grandchild, but admitted he did not monitor his finances carefully. He has been fully 
employed during the period he incurred substantial delinquent debts, and has not taken 
reasonable steps to resolve them. This is not responsible action under the 
circumstances. 
 
 Applicant did not undergo financial counseling. He failed to document any effort 
to resolve the SOR-listed delinquent debts. These facts preclude mitigation under MC 
20(c) or 20(d). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s inability to resolve his financial obligations raises concerns about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules and regulations necessary to 
protect classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
