 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01446 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeremy M. Tempel, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 8, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 9, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and 
G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 18, 2014. Applicant 
answered the SOR in writing in an undated Answer and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 4, 
2014, and I received the case assignment on November 10, 2014. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on January 26, 2015, for a video teleconference hearing on February 
 
2 
 
 
11, 2015. That hearing was cancelled because of video equipment problems and on 
February 19, 2015, another Notice of Hearing was issued. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on February 27, 2015. The Government offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 10, 2015. 
 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until March 13, 2015, to 
submit additional matters. He did not submit any documents by that date. On April 10, 
2015, his counsel requested additional time to submit verification of Applicant’s 
participation in an alcohol support group. There was no objection and I granted the 
request .On April 16, 2015, he submitted Exhibit D, without objection. The record closed 
on April 16, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d, and denied 1.e of the SOR, with explanations. He made the same answers 
to the factual allegations in ¶ 2.a of the SOR because they form the same factual basis 
for the criminal acts alleged in Paragraph 1. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He is not married but has a fiancé. He works for a 
defense contractor. He has worked there for six years, since 2008. His field of expertise 
allowed him to be employed for the past 15 years after graduating with an Associate’s 
Degree in optics. Applicant has a good work record and has not received any 
reprimands or other disciplinary actions He has never received a complaint about his 
work record. (Tr. 13, 14, 30, 37, 63; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant supports himself and his fiancé, gives money to his unemployed 
brother, and helps his sister’s family with financial support. He is also involved in his 
community by working in charity events. He lives in a small town and everyone knows 
each other. (Tr. 21, 31, 32, 61) 
 
 Applicant obtained his security clearance in December 2003. The record does 
not contain any evidence of any security violations during the term of his clearance. 
Applicant went to Afghanistan as part of his civilian job. He does not see himself as a 
security risk. (Tr. 14, 37; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 1999 when he was 19 years old and charged with 
theft and receiving stolen property. He was also charged with possession of alcohol by 
a minor (Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant admitted this allegation. It involved a friend and 
his motorcycle. Applicant’s friend convinced him that the friend was buying the 
motorcycle. He gave his friend a ride ostensibly to pick up the motorcycle. They put the 
motorcycle in Applicant’s truck. Originally Applicant told the government investigator 
that he stole the motorcycle for a friend. Now, at the hearing he claims he could not 
 
3 
 
 
recall what happened with the motorcycle back in 1999. He could not explain the 
difference in the two statements. Applicant received a $2,500 fine and was ordered to 
perform 500 hours of community service, which was every weekend for two years. (Tr. 
15, 16, 38, 39, 40; Exhibit 2) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2009 on charges of criminal mischief, damages 
or defacing property of another without consent, and public intoxication (Subparagraph 
1.b). Applicant admitted this allegation. Applicant stated he tripped into a mirror while 
walking away from a verbal altercation with another bar patron. However, the 
investigative report states he got into a fight with a bar patron and hit a picture hanging 
on the wall. (Tr. 16, 38, 40; Exhibit 2) 
 
 In June 2011 Applicant was arrested and charged with public intoxication 
(Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant admitted this allegation. He had just returned from 
Afghanistan and attended a concert. He got into an argument with his girlfriend in a 
parking garage at the concert venue. Some policemen saw the verbal altercation and 
arrested Applicant for being publically intoxicated. (Tr. 17; Exhibit 2) 
 
 Applicant was arrested March 2012 on a charge of public intoxication 
(Subparagraph 1.d). Applicant admitted this allegation. He was a passenger in a car 
that was involved in a crash. Applicant denied ever driving while under the influence of 
alcohol. His fiancé was supposed to be the “designated driver,” but she drank and had 
the accident. While the police were investigating the accident, they saw Applicant 
nearby and intoxicated. They arrested him for being intoxicated in public. (Tr. 18, 19; 
Exhibit 2)  
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2011 on charges of public intoxication 
(Subparagraph 1.e). Applicant denied this allegation because he testified it was 
incorrect and a duplicate of the allegation in Subparagraph 1.d. He claimed there were 
only four arrests involving him, those being the first four allegations in the SOR. (Tr. 42; 
Exhibit 2)  
 
 Applicant testified he has never had any alcohol-related incidents at work. He 
only drank on weekends. He used to drink Coke and whiskey, and now only has an 
occasional glass of wine on weekends. The last time he drank heavily was three years 
ago in March 2012. He realized that excessive alcohol consumption cost him money 
and made him feel tired. After he received the SOR in June 2014, he started attending 
an alcohol-support group with some friends. He stated his purpose was to help support 
them. He goes to the meetings every other Saturday. His attendance was verified by a 
friend who has also attended the self-help sessions since July 2014. Applicant does not 
consider himself an alcoholic, alcohol dependent, and has never been evaluated or 
diagnosed by a licensed medical professional or an appropriate professional in an 
alcohol treatment program. Applicant admitted he made mistakes in his life and thinks 
he has learned from them. (Tr. 20, 22-26, 35, 42, 44, 47, 49, 50, 55; Exhibits 2, A)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant submitted three character reference letters from two policemen in his 
home town whom he knows personally, and a co-worker on their business projects. 
They write favorable recommendations for Applicant based on their knowledge of him 
personally and professionally. Applicant has never been arrested in the town in which 
he lives. His arrests occurred in larger cities within his state where he went with friends 
for social activities, including attending bars to drink. (Tr. 57; Exhibits 2, A-C) 
 
 Applicant’s attorney asserts that the state changed the law regarding public 
intoxication. He contends that if Applicant performed the acts as listed in the SOR now, 
he would not be arrested because the new law requires harm to himself or someone 
else, not just the status of being publically intoxicated with no other overt act. He did not 
provide  copies of any statutes to support his contention.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and   
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant committed four offenses from 1999 to 2012, three of which involved 
alcohol and a motorcycle theft in the fourth offense. Applicant admitted all of these 
offenses. Both AG ¶ 31 (a) and (c) are established.  
  
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
conditions may potentially apply:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s offenses occurred between three and 16 years ago. Since then he 
earned a community college degree, started his current job six years ago, became 
engaged, and is involved in community charity events. Applicant testified he does not 
drink like he did when he was younger and has learned his lesson. AG ¶ 32 (a) and (d) 
are established.  
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions apply:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
Applicant has four alcohol-related arrests away from work. Three arrests involve 
public intoxication and disturbing the peace. The fourth arrest occurred in 1999 when 
Applicant was charged with being a minor in possession of alcohol and receiving stolen 
property. AG ¶ 22 (a) is established.  
 
Applicant admitted he consumed large amounts of alcohol to the point of 
impairment in the incidents cited in the SOR. After doing so, he got into trouble with the 
police in one or more towns. The habitual or binge consumption of alcohol impaired his 
judgement. Applicant does not have a diagnosis as an alcohol abuser or being alcohol 
dependent. AG ¶ 22 (c) is established.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions apply:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, 
 
7 
 
 
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (it alcohol dependent) or responsible 
use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress.. 
 
 Applicant’s last offense occurred three years ago. Since then he only consumes 
alcohol at home, and has significantly reduced his consumption to save money and 
avoid problems with the police or his family. The time between Applicant’s 1999 arrest 
and the next one was 10 years. He then had two more arrests. The arrests were 
infrequent, with a number of years having passed between them and since the last one. 
His work performance is considered good where he has been employed at his current 
job for six years. The totality of his conduct does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 23 (a) is established. 
 
 Applicant has participated in an alcohol support group since July 2014. He 
testified he went to the program every other weekend to support his friends who are in 
it. His consistent attendance is beneficial. He submitted a supporting letter from another 
program participant. He has moderated his alcohol use and does not travel to other 
communities to consume alcohol in substantial quantities as he did when the SOR 
incidents occurred. He has established a pattern of responsible use.  His desire to buy a 
house and get married is also a moderating influence on his behavior regarding alcohol, 
attending bars, and the tendency to get into legal trouble when he is in those situations. 
He is making satisfactory progress as evidenced by the lack of any incidents in the past 
three years. AG ¶ 23 (b) and (c) are established.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
 
8 
 
 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admitted his past problems, 
and explained they were committed under a state law now modified to remove the 
offense of public intoxication without harm to the perpetrator or a member of the public. 
Applicant is older and more mature since committing the last offense three years ago. In 
that incident he was the passenger in a car driven by his fiancé who lost control of the 
car and crashed. The police arrested Applicant for the offense of being publically 
intoxicated without any other actions on his part.  
 
Applicant stated he learned his lesson. He is no longer interested in experiencing 
the physical symptoms that excessive alcohol consumption gives him nor spending 
money on court fines. He made permanent behavioral changes. There is no likelihood 
of recurrence of such conduct and arrests. The passage of at least three years also 
mitigates these offenses.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption. I conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                  
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
9 
 
 
 
