1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03242
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on April 11, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidation
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on
September 22, 2014, detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Trustworthiness determination Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 ion(App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 2; Item 3. 2
Item 1; Item 3.3
2
Applicant received the SOR. He submitted a notarized, written response to the
SOR allegations dated October 10, 2014. He did not request a hearing. A decision on
the written record will be made in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on March 4, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on March
20, 2015. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated March
30, 2015. DOHA assigned this case to me on April 16, 2015. The Government
submitted six exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-6 and admitted into the
record. Applicant’s response to the SOR is attached to the SOR, and like the SOR has
been marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM is admitted into the record as
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A to AE H.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a,
1.c, 1.d, and 2.a of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.
He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e of the SOR.  He also provided1
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 58 years old, works in janitorial services for a DOD contractor.
He began his current position in April 2013. He also works part-time, evenings and
weekends, as a sales associate in the building supply industry, a position he has held
since May 1998. Applicant previously worked as a groundskeeper.2
Applicant did not complete his high school education. He married in May 1981.
He and his wife have three adult children, ages 33, 29, and 28. He also has a
stepdaughter, age 35. At the time of his 2013 personal subject interview, his 29-year-old
daughter lived with him, but his other children lived independently. It is unknown if his
daughter and wife work or if they provide financial support to the family.              3
Item 1; Items 4-6; AE D.4
Item 1; Items 4-6; AE F.5
Item 1; Item 3; Item 6.6
3
The SOR identified five purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by
credit reports from 2013, 2014 and 2015, totaling approximately $40,000. Some
accounts have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection
agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in the credit reports, in many
instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the same creditor or collection
agency name or under a different creditor or collection agency name. Some accounts
are identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial
account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others
eliminating other digits.
SOR allegation 1.a states that Applicant owes $15,237 to a credit union. This
debt appears to be a repossessed automobile. The credit reports of record provide
conflicting information about Applicant’s accounts with this creditor. The April 2013
credit report shows three accounts with this creditor. One account is in good standing;
one account is paid and closed; and one account is in past-due status. The May 2014
credit report reflects only one account with this creditor, which Applicant disputed. The
February 2015 credit report shows only one charged-off account. Applicant does not
deny this debt. He advised that he has a payment plan with the creditor and that he is
making payments on this debt. He provided two separate printouts with confusing
information about what he is doing financially. I am unable to determine from the
documentation the amount of his payment, how often his payment was being made, and
the terms of his repayment plan.  4
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $785 on a medical bill. In his response, he
denied this debt on the ground that the debt is resolved. This debt is only listed on the
May 2014 credit report. He provided documentation showing that the debt had been
deleted from his credit report after a challenge to the debt; however, the creditor
identified as being deleted is not the same creditor as listed in the SOR. He provided a
medical bill for asthma treatment. His documentation shows the asthma bill as paid, but
it does not provide any information reflecting that the recent zero balance asthma bill is
related to the $785 bill.5
The $10,472 debt in SOR allegation 1.c concerns a truck loan Applicant co-
signed with his son. His son could not make the payments, and the truck was voluntarily
repossessed. The April 2013 credit report reflects that the original creditor closed and
transferred this account to a collection agency. Based on the original account balance,
the new creditor shows the account as a paid charged-off account. Applicant later
disputed this debt, which was removed from his credit report in October 2013.6
Item 1; Items 3-5.7
Item 1; Item 3.8
Item 1; Items 4-6;  AE A - AE F.9
Items 1-3.10
AE G; AE H.11
4
Applicant advised the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator that
he did not recognize the $106 debt in SOR allegation 1.d. He disputed this debt, and it
was removed from his credit report in September 2013.7
The SOR alleges a $13,315 debt on a vehicle repossession. Applicant advised
the OPM investigator that he did not recognize this debt. In his response to the SOR, he
stated that he contacted the creditor, and the creditor told him that it did not have any
record of an account in his name or with his Social Security number. He has disputed
this debt, but he has not shown the result of his dispute.8
Applicant retained the services of a credit repair and consulting company to work
with him to resolve his debts. Through this company, he has successfully disputed three
debts, which have been removed from his credit reports. He is disputing one additional
account (SOR ¶ 1.e). The February 2015 credit report indicates a delinquent cell phone
bill for $491. Applicant provided documentation indicating that he has paid his cable bill
in full; that he has resolved in full two other non-SOR accounts; and he is paying on an
account with a small remaining balance. His current income and monthly expenses are
unknown. Applicant’s credit report reflects that he pays his mortgage and other bills.9
When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he answered “no” to the questions about
past-due debts, loan defaults, and debts turned over to collection agencies. When he
met with the OPM investigator, he voluntarily changed his response to these questions
after being asked to verify his answer. He explained to the OPM investigator that he did
not know his account information. During his interview, he also denied knowledge of
three SOR debts. In his response to the SOR, he indicated that he was confused by the
question and that he had cosigned some of the loans and did not realize the debts were
on his credit report and needed to be listed.10
Applicant provided a copy of his most recent performance evaluation. His
supervisor rated him as a valued employee. A co-worker described him as a hard-
working individual who pays attention to detail. He is responsible in the performance of
his work and any assigned duties. His co-worker considers him honorable and
trustworthy. According to his co-worker, Applicant’s “word is his bond. ”11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
5
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security clearance concern relating to the guideline for Financial
Considerations is set out in AG & 18:      
6
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect sensitive [classified information]. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise a security
concerns. I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially
applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems when he was unable to pay his
debts. Most of the debts had not been resolved at the time the SOR was issued. These
two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
The record lacks any information that reflect Applicant’s financial problems are
the result of unemployment, divorce, unexpected medical emergency, or any other
event that was beyond his control. Applicant has not provided any concrete evidence
establishing a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. He did indicate that he is paying on
debt, but his documentation is inadequate to show his payments. He has not mitigated
the security concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d).
7
Although Applicant hired a company to help him resolve his debts, he has not
provided evidence of financial counseling. Without a budget and verification of his
income, it is difficult to determine if his finances are under control. When Applicant met
with the OPM investigator, he denied any knowledge of the debts in SOR allegations
1.d and 1.e. The debt in SOR allegation 1.b was not discussed during his interview with
the OPM investigator because it did not appear on his credit report until a year later.
The debt in SOR allegation 1.c is the same as the third debt he denied knowing when
he discussed the debts on his credit report with the OPM investigator. The April 2013
credit report reflects that this debt is paid. Because the debts in SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d
and 1.e were unknown to Applicant, he had a reasonable basis to dispute these debts.
AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts. The evidence is insufficient to find that Applicant
mitigated the Government’s security concerns under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
The Government alleges falsification by Applicant when he completed his 2013
e-QIP (SOR ¶ 2.a) by failing to list the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e. For AG ¶ 16(a)
to apply, Applicant’s omissions must be deliberate. The Government established that
Applicant omitted material facts from his 2013 security clearance application when he
answered “no” to questions asking about delinquent debts, collection accounts, and
payment defaults. This information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s
trustworthiness and honesty. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his answers on his
security clearance applications. 
When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313312
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
8
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the
time the omission occurred.12
In the instant case, Applicant voluntarily indicated to the investigator that he did
not list some debts because he did not know the account information. He also denied
knowledge of three debts listed in his credit reports. Because he lacked any knowledge
of a number of debts on his credit report and he voluntarily provided information to the
OPM investigator about his debts, I find that intentional falsification of his answers about
the status of his fiances and past-due debts is not established. A security concern has
not been raised under AG ¶ 16(a).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
overextended himself when he cosigned a car loan with his son. He also fell behind in
another car loan for himself. He did not provide any reason for why he could not pay
these debts. He has not provided a copy of his earnings statement or a budget, which
9
could help assess his current finances, including his ability to pay his debts and his
customary living expenses. He indicated that he is paying the large debt in SOR
allegation 1.a, but the documentation he provided is unclear about what his payments
are, how often he is making his payments, and what his current balance is on the debt.
He did not provide a copy of the agreement reached with the creditor to settle this debts
Applicant appears to pay his mortgage, and he established that he paid other small
debts. He disputed the second largest SOR debt, but the result of his dispute is
unknown. After a complete review of the record, it is concluded that this record lacks
sufficient information for a favorable determination under Guideline F. Applicant did not
intentionally falsify his answers on his e-QIP.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude that a security concern arising from his personal conduct under Guideline E
has not been shown; however, Applicant has not fully mitigated the security concerns
about his finances under Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
