 
1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 14-02299
                    )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on March 27, 2014. The Department of Defense (DOD)
Consolidated Adjudications Facility, (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence on
September 8, 2014. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For
1GE 1; Tr. 14-15, 17, 39.
 
2
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 17, 2014. He
answered the SOR in writing the same day. He requested a hearing before an
administrative judge with the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 7, 2015, and I received the
case assignment on February 23, 2015.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 3,
2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 23, 2015. The Government
offered one exhibit (GE.) 1, which was received, marked, and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified. Applicant submitted one exhibit (AE) A, which was
received, marked, and admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on
March 23, 2015. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 31, 2015.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
       
Motion to Amend
At the hearing, Department Counsel motioned to amend the SOR to add
allegation 1.f concerning assets held by Applicant in India. (Tr. 43-44) SOR allegation
1.f would read as follows: “You have assets in India, including bank accounts, an
interest in an apartment, an interest in three pieces of land, and an insurance policy.”
Applicant did not object to the amendment. The motion to amend the SOR was granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts relating to India. The request and the attached documents were not
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1, I-XIV. The
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters
not subject to reasonable dispute, and they are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
SOR. He provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a public
trust position.  
Applicant, who is 53 years old, works as a software developer for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in March 2014. Before starting his current
position, Applicant was unemployed for four months. He previously worked analyzing
payroll and as a consultant.1
2GE 1; Tr. 16.
3Tr. 16, 38.
4The Government did not allege a security concern about this brother.
5GE 1; Tr. 17-22. 
6Tr. 40-42.
 
3
Applicant was born and raised in India. He graduated from high school and
college in India. He received his bachelor’s degree in 1984 and later received a diploma
in computer science. Applicant married in 1998. His wife was born and raised in India.
They immigrated to the United States in February 1999. Applicant’s 14-year-old
daughter is a United State citizen by birth and resides in the United States. Applicant
became a United States citizen in 2006 and holds only a United States passport. His
wife is also a naturalized United States citizen, holds a United States passport and
resides in the United States.2
Applicant currently resides in State A because of his employment. His wife and
daughter continue to reside in the family home in State B, where his wife works and his
daughter attends school. Applicant and his wife own their home in State B, which he
values at $356,000.3
Applicant’s father and father-in-law are deceased. His 80-year-old mother is a
citizen and resident of India. Applicant’s oldest brother, who is 60 years old, is a citizen
and resident of Canada.4 Applicant’s second brother, who is  58 years old, is a citizen
and resident of India. This brother recently retired from his position as a bank clerk in a
privately owned bank. The second brother’s wife does not work. Applicant’s third
brother, who is  56 years old, is a citizen of India and a resident of Qatar. He has
resided in Qatar for 18 years, where he works as an instrumentation designer for a
company owned by the Qatar government. He may retire to India in the future. The third
brother’s wife works as a bank clerk. Applicant’s 50-year-old sister is a citizen and
resident of India. She does not work. Her husband is a pediatrician in private practice.
His 67-year-old mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of India. She does not work.5
Applicant’s mother never worked. She now lives with his second brother. He talks
with his mother infrequently. She has a hearing problem, especially with long-distance
telephone calls. He provides money for her health care when necessary. He speaks
with his sister about once a week. He talks with his brother who lives in India when
emergencies occur and for celebrations. He occasionally talks with his brother who lives
in Qatar. He has occasional email communication with these brothers.6
Applicant traveled to India in 2007, 2008, 2011, and 2012 to visit family and
friends. He was not approached by officials of the Indian government during his visits.
7GE 1; Tr. 23.
8AE A identifies the value of the land in India in rupies. At the hearing, the parties stipulated to a conversion
rate of 63 rupies to one U.S. dollar. The estimated value is based on this stipulation. AE A; Tr. 27-28.
9AE A; Tr. 23-30; 38-39.
10AE A; Tr. 31-37, 39.
 
4
He was not involved in any criminal activity nor was he approached by individuals
connected with terrorists organizations, foreign intelligence, foreign security, or foreign
military. No one attempted to obtain any information from him about businesses in the
United States or from the United States government. His family members in India are
not politically active. They do not have contacts with government officials, and they are
not involved in volunteer organizations.7
Besides the home in State B, Applicant has three 401k accounts in the United
States with a total value of $91,000. His wife has a retirement account in the United
States valued at approximately $250,000. Applicant’s mother unilaterally purchased
three pieces of land for him in India. The first piece of land is worth approximately
$2,381; the second piece land is worth $754; and the third piece of land is worth
approximately $606.8 The land is titled in his name and he plans to sell the land after his
mother dies. Applicant’s wife purchased with her mother an apartment in India worth
approximately $23,810. Applicant’s name is not on the title, and his wife will sell the
apartment when her mother dies.9
Applicant owns a pension insurance policy that he purchased in India. This policy
is worth approximately $1,016. Because this is a pension policy, Applicant cannot close
it or buy it back. Applicant receives less than $100 every six months as a payout from
this account. He give this money to his mother. Applicant opened a checking account
when he lived in India. Applicant borrowed about $9,500 from his sister and deposited
$7,936 in his checking account. The account has a current value of approximately
$8,600. His mother receives the interest from this account. Applicant has a nonresident
checking account that he opened after he arrived in the United States worth
approximately $1,650. His wife has two bank accounts in India. She recently deposited
$7,936 in each account. With existing funds, the two accounts have a total value of
approximately $16,761. His wife invested money for their daughter’s education in India’s
banks because the interest rate was higher. She plans to return the money to he United
States in the future. His wife also recently cashed United States stocks valued at
$20,000 and the money remained in the United States.10
Applicant’s land and bank accounts in India have a total value of approximately
$15,029. His individual holdings in the United States are his three retirement accounts
totaling $91,000. He and his wife share joint ownership of a house in State B, which
cost $356,000 at the time of purchase. His wife has a retirement account in the United
11There is no evidence that the Government of India was involved in, or sanctioned, the criminal activity
mentioned in the Government’s brief. 
12HE 1;
 
5
States valued at approximately $250,000, and she has assets in India valued at
approximately $40,571.
India
I take administrative notice of the following facts. India is the largest democratic
country in the world. Like the United States, India is committed to political freedom
protected by a representative government. The United States and India share a
common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, in fighting terrorism and in
creating a strategically stable Asia. Although the two countries differed over India’s
nuclear weapons program and the pace of economic reforms in India, the United States
views India as a growing world power with which it shares common strategic interests.
Because of their strong partnership, the United States and India enjoy a very active
working relationship on many issues, including terrorism, space, and nuclear weapons.
The United States has authorized the sales of certain arms to India. India is a collector
of economic information and maintains a positive relations with Iran. The Government
contends that India seeks to obtain proprietary information by violating United States
export laws and references specific cases, but does not provide any detailed
information about these cases.11 The government of India generally respects the rights
of its citizens, although some serious human rights problems remain. The Indian
government does not support or sponsor terrorism or terrorist organizations. However,
several terrorist organizations, including Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islam, Harakat ul-Mujahidin,
Indian Mujahideen, Haish-e-Mohammed, and lashkar-e Tayyiba, and insurgent groups
continue to operate, particularly in the northeast areas along the Pakistan and China
borders. Several of these areas are designated “restricted areas” by the Indian
government and require special permission to visit. Applicant’s family lives many
hundreds of miles from these restricted areas.12
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are
 
6
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness
decision. 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
7
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in  United States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation.
Applicant’s wife and daughter are citizens and residents of the United States and
are not a trustworthiness concern. His oldest brother is a citizen and resident of Canada
and is not a trustworthiness concern. His mother, mother-in-law, one brother, and sister
are citizens and residents of India. This brother is a retired bank clerk. His mother,
mother-in-law, and sister do not work. His third brother is a citizen of India, living in
Qatar and working for a company owned by the Qatar government. Applicant maintains
 
8
a normal familial relationship with his mother and siblings living in India. He talks with
them by telephone regularly and periodically visits them in India. He does not provide
regular financial support for his mother; however, he does provide money for health
care when necessary. He provides support primarily through interest earned on one
bank account and his small insurance policy. His sister recently agreed to loan him
about $9,500, most of which he placed in a bank account for his mother’s use. He owns
three pieces of land worth less than $4,000, which his mother purchased for him. His
wife has assets worth approximately 40,000 in India. His family relationships and assets
are not per se a reason to deny Applicant a trustworthiness determination, but his
contacts with his family members must be considered in deciding whether to grant
Applicant a trustworthiness determination. The Government must establish that these
family relationships create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion by terrorists or would create a potential conflict of
interest between his obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire to help
his family members by providing that information. 
In determining if such a risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s assets and
relationships and contacts with his family, as well as the activities of the Government of
India and of terrorist organizations within India’s borders. The risk that an applicant
could be targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising sensitive information is
real, not theoretical. Applicant’s relationship and contacts with his family in India raise a
heightened risk and a security concern because significant terrorism activities occur
within the borders of India. The evidence of record fails to show that the Indian
Government targets United States citizens in the United States or in India by exploiting,
manipulating, pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected information. Thus, the
concern that the Indian Government will seek classified information is moderate.
Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of  United
States interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in India cause trustworthiness
concerns, I considered that India and the United States have a strong relationship,
which includes working together on international security issues and trade. There is no
evidence that the Indian Government targets United States citizens for protected
information  The human rights issues in India, although improving, and terrorist activities
continue to be a concern. While none of these considerations by themselves dispose of
the issue, they are all factors to be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to
pressure or coercion because of his family, bank accounts, and property in India.
Applicant’s contacts with his family, the bank accounts, and the property raise a
heightened risk under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) and a concern under AG ¶ 7(e).
The Foreign Influence guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 8(a) through ¶ 8(f),
and the following are potentially applicable:
 
9
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the  United States, that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the  United States interest; and,
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.
While he has lived in the United States for over 15 years and has abandoned his
Indian citizenship to become a citizen of the United States, Applicant still has close ties
with his family members in India. He travels to India regularly, and in between visits, he
routinely communicates with his family members. His elderly mother and mother-in-law
have always been homemakers and do not have ties with the Indian government. His
one brother living in India is retired, does not have contacts with the Indian government,
and is not involved in activities which would raise the interests of the Indian government.
His sister is a homemaker and married to a physician in private practice. The contacts
and activities of his mother, mother-in-law, brother, and sister in India do not involve the
Indian government. Their normal daily lives and activities in India are unlikely to place
Applicant in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States
and the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government. Applicant
voluntarily chose to give up his Indian citizenship when he decided to become a United
States citizen, as did his wife. Most of his assets are in the United States, where he has
worked and lived for more than 15 years. His decisions reflect his loyalty to the United
States and not to India. Thus, he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the United States.
 Applicant’s third brother lives in Qatar, where he works for a company owned by
the Qatar government. No information was provided that Qatar or his brother’s work
raises a heightened security concern. However, it does not appear to relate to the
Indian defense establishment, and is not a security concern. Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns raised by his family members in India under AG ¶¶ 8 (a) and (b).
Applicant’s three pieces of land, one small pension policy, and two bank
accounts total less than $17,000. His wife has a shared interest in a piece of property
and two bank accounts valued at just over $40.000. Their total financial assets in the
United States total more than $700,000, making it highly unlikely that he could be
 
10
subject to coercion or pressure because of the money and property in India or a need
for money. Applicant placed the money in these accounts, not the Government of India,
for his convenience. Except for the small pension policy, he can withdraw the money
from two bank accounts at any time. He can also sell his land, but does not wish to
insult his mother by selling the land while she is alive. This money is not controlled by
the Government of India. He has mitigated the security concerns about their minor
financial interest in India under AG ¶ 8(f). 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a trustworthiness determination requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors,
both favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a trustworthiness
concern is established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position should not be made as punishment for
specific past conduct, but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of
record to decide if a nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate
trustworthiness concern.
The evidence in support of granting a position of trust to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
maintains strong connections with his family in India. He visits them regularly, and in
between, he routinely talks with various family members by telephone. Despite his
family relationships, he made a decision over 15 years ago to leave his family and move
to the United States. He has established a home for himself, his wife and his daughter
in the United States, and he has worked for United States companies for many years.
 
11
After seven years in the United States, he applied for United States citizenship, knowing
that he would lose his Indian citizenship and his rights as an Indian citizen. He has
accumulated significant assets in the United States, not in India. He and his wife total
assets in India constitute less than 10% of their total wealth. These assets in India are
insufficient to place him in a position of vulnerability to future exploitation or coercion.
His decision to move to the United States and to abandon his Indian citizenship reflects
his choice to be loyal to the United States and to resolve any conflicts in favor of the
United States.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his family in
India under Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of
trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
