 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redcated] )  ISCR Case No. 14-01594 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 25, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On July 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on February 10, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on February 11, 
2015. Applicant received the FORM on February 20, 2015. He had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. He timely submitted a Response to FORM which is admitted as 
Item 5. Department Counsel objected to Applicant’s Response to FORM, but did not 
state a specific basis for the objection. Department Counsel’s response to Applicant’s 
Response to FORM is admitted as Item 6. On March 31, 2015, the FORM was 
forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me on April 2, 2015.    
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 3 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. The two-page document is a portion of a 
summary of an interview of Applicant which occurred between January 14, 2014, to 
January 31, 2014, in conjunction with his background investigation. DoDD 5220.6, 
enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness 
provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR 
Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014). Although Applicant, who is 
representing himself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua 
sponte. While it is clear that Department Counsel is attempting to act in good-faith, 
having highlighted the issue in a footnote in the FORM, Item 3 is not authenticated. 
(See Government’s FORM, p.2, footnote 1) Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a 
response to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.  Waiver means “the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). Applicant was not expressly informed of the 
requirement in ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive that an ROI may be received with an 
authenticating witness. I cannot conclude he expressly waived this rule. He did not 
mention Item 3 in his response to the FORM. He may not have read the footnote 
advising him to review Item 3 for accuracy. I am also concerned because only a portion 
of the interview was provided. I cannot conclude that Applicant’s failure to address the 
accuracy of Item 3 in his response to the FORM was a knowing waiver of the rules 
outlined in the Directive, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20. Item 3 is not admissible and will not be 
considered in this Decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to SOR allegations 1.a – 1.i. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old male employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor, seeking to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with 
the company since July 2012.  He has a high school diploma. From January 1980 to 
March 2007, he served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps. He received an 
Honorable Discharge. He is married and has no children. (Item 2)   
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on December 31, 2013. (Item 4) A subsequent background investigation 
revealed that Applicant had eight delinquent debts, a total approximate balance of 
$19,265. In his response to the SOR, Applicant also admitted that he filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in December 1999 and the debts were discharged in 2000. (Items 1, 2 and 
4)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts include a $5,949 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Item 4 at 3); a $4,503 delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶  1.c: 
Item 4 at 3); a $1,234 delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: 
Item 4 at 4); a $950 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 6); a $1,234  
delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f:  Item 4 at 7); a $2,589 
delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 10); a $1,851 
delinquent account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 4 at 10); and a $1,246 
account placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 4 at 11) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant indicates he began experiencing financial 
difficulties between 2011 and 2012. He lost his job as a Department of Defense 
employee.  He took a lesser paying job.  From 2010 to 2012, he provided support to his 
sister-in-law who had cancer. She passed away in 2012. Applicant is in the process of 
making arrangements with a law group to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 
1.g, 1.h, and 1.i.  Applicant hopes to resolve these debts in order for his financial 
situation to become more manageable. Remaining qualified for a security clearance 
would allow him to obtain reasonable paying jobs and a more promising career track. 
He hopes to retain his security clearance. (Item 5)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
4 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that he has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past several years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Although Applicant indicates that he is beginning to resolve his debts, he did not provide 
 
5 
 
 
verification that he has a debt repayment plan or proof of any payments made towards 
resolving his delinquent debts.    
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because Applicant was 
underemployed between 2011 and 2012. At the same time, he provided support to his 
sister-in-law who was undergoing cancer treatment. Applicant encountered 
circumstances beyond his control which caused some financial problems. However, I 
cannot conclude that he acted responsibly under the circumstances because he 
provided no proof he is in the process of resolving his delinquent debts.   
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. The 
record evidence does not support the premise that Applicant’s problems are being 
resolved.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. While Applicant maintains he is the process 
of resolving his delinquent accounts, he did not provide documentation to verify the 
steps he is taking to resolve his financial problems. Applicant failed to demonstrate that 
he is making a good-faith effort to resolve the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b – 1.i. 
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue.)  While Applicant is in the process of disputing all of his delinquent accounts, it is 
too soon to conclude that his efforts will succeed.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active-duty 
service with the U.S. Marine Corps and his Honorable Discharge. I considered his 
favorable employment history with defense contractors. I considered there were 
circumstances beyond his control which contributed to Applicant’s financial problems.  
However, Applicant  had several years to work on resolving his financial problems, but 
did not attempt to resolve his delinquent debts until the last minute.    
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. In other words, if they have trouble managing their finances, this can raise 
doubts about their ability to handle and protect classified information. Applicant’s history 
of financial problems raises doubts about his ability to handle and protect classified 
information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases where there is doubt in favor of national 
security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   Against  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                       
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
