 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01461 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 26, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 16, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 11, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were marked 
AE E through I and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on February 23, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1998. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since the late 1970s. He has a master’s degree. He married in 1976 and 
divorced in 1978. He does not have any children.1 
 
 Applicant prepares his own income tax returns. His 2007 income tax return was 
complicated by a non-elective sale of stock options. The income from the sale was 
incorrectly reported twice to the IRS. It took several years for Applicant to reconcile the 
matter. He obtained an extension until October 15, 2008, but he did not file a federal 
income tax return for tax year 2007 until May 18, 2011. He filed an amended return on 
April 15, 2013. The amended return indicated that Applicant was due a refund of 
$1,849. The IRS accepted the return and credited $1,849 toward Applicant’s 2008 
taxes.2 The IRS credited the refund to the 2008 taxes because the original return was 
filed within three years of its due date.3 
 
 Applicant did not file a federal income tax return for tax year 2008 when it was 
due. He admitted that he “procrastinated.” He felt he would be due a refund from 2007, 
and it would be carried forward to his 2008 return. He stated that he “wanted to keep it 
clean with the carryover.” He filed the 2008 return in 2013. The IRS indicated that 
Applicant would have been due a refund of $3,553 if the return had been timely filed.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 11, 42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-30, 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-C, E-G. 
 
3 The IRS provides the following guidance at http://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc153.html:  
 
There is no penalty for failure to file if you are due a refund. But, if you wait to file a return 
or otherwise claim a refund, you risk losing a refund altogether. An original return 
claiming a refund must be filed within 3 years of its due date for a refund to be allowed in 
most instances.  
 
After the expiration of the three-year window, the refund statute prevents the issuance of 
a refund check and the application of any credits, including overpayments of estimated or 
withholding taxes, to other tax years that are underpaid. However, the statute of 
limitations for the IRS to assess and collect any outstanding balances does not start until 
a return has been filed. In other words, there is no statute of limitations for assessing and 
collecting the tax if no return has been filed.  
 
4 Tr. at 31-39; AE D, G. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2013 
when they were due.5 Applicant noted on his December 2013 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) that he did not file his tax returns. He discussed his 
failure to file during his background interview in January 2014. He stated that in late 
2013 he received a letter from the IRS requesting his 2008 income tax return. He stated 
that he would likely retain an attorney to address the matter. He sent the IRS estimated 
tax payments every year and he did not believe he owed the IRS. In July 2014, 
Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories asking for tax transcripts.6 
 
 Applicant had not filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 
2013 as of the hearing date of February 11, 2015. The record was held open until 
March 11, 2015, for Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. In a 
memorandum dated March 11, 2015, Applicant stated that he “filled out [his] 2009 
return, and will complete the 2010, 2011, and 2012 returns within the next two weeks.” 
He did not provide a copy of the 2009 return. He wrote that he did not have an 
accountant or tax preparer assist him because his returns are always “easy.”7  
 
 Applicant lives a frugal lifestyle, and he has substantial assets. His assets totaled 
just over $5 million. He does not believe he will owe the IRS once his tax returns are 
filed. He has the assets to pay the IRS if he does owe anything.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 The SOR did not allege that Applicant failed to file his 2013 income tax return. That information will not 
be used for disqualification purposes. It may be used in the application of mitigating conditions and during 
the whole-person analysis. 
 
6 Tr. at 39, 42-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
7 Tr. at 39; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. at 40-41, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE E, H, I. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 2007 through 2012. The above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
5 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant’s 2007 income tax return was complicated by a non-elective sale of 
stock options. He eventually filed a return in 2011. That conduct is mitigated. He finally 
filed his 2008 return in 2013. That conduct is also mitigated. 
 
 Applicant knew in 2013 that his taxes were a concern to the DOD. He did not file 
his tax returns after he was interviewed for his background investigation, after he 
responded to DOHA interrogatories, or after he received the SOR. On March 11, 2015, 
he stated that he “filled out [his] 2009 return, and will complete the 2010, 2011, and 
2012 returns within the next two weeks.” He did not provide a copy of the 2009 return.  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to comply with laws and regulations. There are no mitigating 
conditions applicable to Applicant’s failure to file his 2009 through 2012 income tax 
returns when they were due.9   
 
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, reliability, and a 
sense of his or her legal obligations. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal 
obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information. Indeed, the Board has 
previously noted that a person who has a history of not fulfilling their legal obligation to 
file income tax returns may be said not to have demonstrated the high degree of 
judgment and reliability required for access to classified information. (internal citation 
omitted) 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
  
 I considered Applicant’s long and stable work history. He is not financially 
overextended; he is quite wealthy. However, his failure to file his tax returns is 
problematic. He failed to fulfill fundamental legal requirements. I have significant 
concerns about his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to comply with laws 
and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
