1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04673
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
April 23, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 22, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing in this case. The case was initially assigned to another
Administrative Judge on February 18, 2015, and the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 19, 2015. The case was
reassigned to this Administrative Judge on March 5, 2015, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on that date. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A through I, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript
2
of the hearing (Tr) on March 23, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits,
and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record discussed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 47 years old. He was born in Bangladesh, moved to the United
States in 1994, and became a United States citizen in 2000. Applicant was first married
from 2005 to 2007, and has been married to his current wife from 2008 to the present.
He has two sons. Applicant earned two Master’s of Science degrees, the first in 1994 in
Electrical Engineering, and the second in 2003 in Computer Science. Applicant is
employed as a Senior Software Engineer by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F -  Financial Considerations)
The SOR lists one allegation, 1.a., regarding financial difficulties of Applicant.
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant has an overdue debt for a collection account
in the amount of $93,952. In his RSOR, Applicant denied this allegation. He wrote that
this debt originated from an equity line of credit for his home. In 2010, he attempted to
sell his home, but was unable to do so. He requested that the bank give him more time
to sell the home, but they declined and ultimately foreclosed on his home. 
Applicant testified that he purchased a home in 2005 for $475,000. Seven
months after purchasing his home, his pre-arranged first marriage was breaking up
because of his wife’s infidelity. He filed for divorce, which took two years to conclude.
Applicant stated that the divorce cost him more than 60 percent of the savings that it
had taken him ten years to accumulate. After the divorce Applicant remarried in 2008,
and he purchased a new home to be closer to where his new wife was attending
college. He initially rented out his first house. (Exhibit C.)  After a few months his tenant
for the house lost her job, and he was unable to find a new tenant. Applicant testified
that this was when his financial difficulties began.  (Tr at 33-37.)
He immediately worked with a realtor and the bank/mortgage holder to obtain
approval for a short sale. The bank recommended to him that he stop making mortgage
payments for three months so that he could receive approval for the short sale. He was
unable to locate a buyer for the house and, despite Applicant’s best efforts, the house
remained on sale for 176 days. Ultimately when the bank would not give home approval
to sell the house at a reduced amount, the house was foreclosed. (Exhibits D, E, F.)
During this same period, Applicant, who had been using five credit cards to help pay his
bills, made payment plans with all five of the credit card companies. He has now paid off
four of the five credit cards, as confirmed in Exhibit G.  (Tr at 37-38, 41-45.) 
3
Applicant testified he makes net earnings of $6,595 a month, and his wife has
$2,000 a month net, and that currently he is not late on any of his debts.  (Tr at 48-49.)  
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid
answers to Questions asked under section 26 of an Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-Quip), executed by him on February 11, 2014. (Exhibit 1.)
The questions asked whether in the last seven years, Applicant has had any bills turned
over to a collection agency; Applicant has had any account or credit card suspended,
charged off or canceled for failing to pay as agreed; or whether Applicant had been over
120 days delinquent on any debt. It also asked if Applicant is currently over 120 days
delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered, “No,” to all of these questions and listed no
debts. It is alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that information
concerning his finances and overdue debt as set forth in subparagraph 1.a., above.
In his RSOR, Applicant denied this allegation. During his testimony, Applicant
stated that when he completed his security clearance application in 2014, he did not
believe any of his debts were overdue or met any of the criteria in which he should have
answered, “Yes,” because he had been informed by the bank that he did not owe
anything further for the house that had been repossessed. (Tr at 45-48.) 
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a number of documents in mitigation. There were seven
extremely positive character letters submitted on Applicant’s behalf, six from individuals
who know Applicant in his professional capacity and one from an M.D., who is also a
neighbor and friend. (Exhibit B.) All of the letters were written in very laudatory terms as
they described Applicant. The first letter was from a manager for Applicant’s current
employer, who was Applicant’s manager from 2005 to 2008. He described Applicant as
“trustworthy and reliable and his performance at work consistently exceeds
expectations.”
Applicant also submitted a current Personal Financial Statement. (Exhibit H.) It
shows that Applicant a net income of $6,595, with an additional $2,000 from his wife,
and his monthly expenses are $6,040. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F -  Financial Considerations)
        The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant had accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s overdue finances occurred as a result of his divorce and the downturn in the
economy. Applicant has acted responsibly by first attempting to sell his house, then
contacting the mortgage holder to ascertain if he owed any money on his foreclosed
home, and ultimately being informed that he did not. Additionally, while it was not
alleged on the SOR, Applicant had five overdue credit card debts. He subsequently
developed payment plans with all five of them, has now paid off four of the debts, and is
in the process of paying off the last one. Therefore, I find that this mitigating condition is
a factor for consideration in this case. 
I also find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable because Applicant has “initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” by contacting the
bank and learning that he does not owe any debt to it, and paying off four of the five
credit card debts, while continuing to make payments toward paying off the fifth debt.  
I conclude that at this time Applicant has reduced and resolved the majority of his
overdue debt, and his current financial situation is stable. Therefore, Applicant has
mitigated the financial concerns of the Government, and I resolve Guideline F for
Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:  
      Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
6
         The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, unreliability,
and untrustworthiness.  In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I
conclude that there was no “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire” by Applicant, because
Applicant testified credibly that he had a good-faith belief that he did not have any
overdue debts as he had been informed from a representative of the bank that he did
not owe any additional amount to the bank. I do not find any disqualifying condition
under ¶ 16 (a) applies against Applicant.  I, therefore, resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigation conditions apply under Guideline F, and none of the
disqualifying conditions apply under Guideline E, I find that the record evidence leaves
me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
       In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
        
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
