                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )   ISCR  Case No.  14-02768            
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On July 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 12, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on February 15, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on
March 25, 2015. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on April 7, 2015.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with his documented unemployment
record. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted five days to supplement the
record. The Government was afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted,
Applicant provided documentation of his state unemployment statements covering his
years of unemployment between November 2005 and March 2015. His submission was
admitted as AE A.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) incurred three adverse judgments
exceeding $27,000; (b) petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in May 2005; and (c)
accumulated four delinquent post-bankruptcy debts exceeding $2,000. Allegedly, each of
the alleged debts remains delinquent.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He claimed
he was laid off on multiple occasions, beginning in 1986. He claimed layoffs in 1991,
2005, and 2008. He claimed the judgments covered in subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c are
related to the same voluntary repossession of the vehicle he purchased in 2006 for use in
his mortgage closing business. And he claimed he is a law abiding citizen who takes pride
in his work for his defense contractor employer. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old word processor for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his spouse in June 1969 and has no children from this marriage.
(GE 1) He claimed no post-high school educational credits or military service.
Applicant’s finances
Between 1991 and October 2013, Applicant was laid off on multiple occasions. His
reported employment history reflects layoffs between November 2005 and November
2006, between November 2006 and November 2007, between September 2008 and
December 2008, between April 2009 and June 2009, and between June 2010 and
3
October 2013. (GE 1 and AE A) After returning to full-time employment in 2013, he
worked for eight months before he was again laid off in 2014. (Tr. 25, 30) 
Applicant’s state unemployment records reflect his collection of state
unemployment benefits during his layoffs. (AE A) Applicant’s unemployment benefit
statements reveal that he collected approximately $41,640 in unemployment benefits
between 2005 and 2015. (AE A)
Throughout his recurrent periods of unemployment, Applicant accrued debts that
he could not pay for or otherwise resolve. Unable to pay or otherwise resolve his debts
with his recurrent layoffs, Applicant petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in May
2005. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 27-28) He was granted a discharge in August 2005. Since his
bankruptcy discharge, he accumulated additional delinquent debts that he has not been
able to address with payoffs or payment plans. (GEs 1 and 2) Applicant’s credit report
(GE 2) does not reflect any payment progress on any of these debts since they became
delinquent. 
Two of Applicant’s post-bankruptcy creditors reduced their carried delinquent
balances with Applicant to judgments: (a) Creditor 1.a obtained a judgment in February
2013 for the liquidated sum of $17,989 on a defaulted vehicle loan; (b) creditor 1.b in July
2010 for $7,756. (GE 2) A third judgment was reportedly filed by creditor 1.c in May 2007
for $1,575. (GE 2) This third judgment covers a purchase money loan Applicant obtained
to meet the lender’s requirements for his 2006 vehicle purchase from creditor 1.a’s
predecessor.  (GE 2; Tr. 31)  
Applicant’s credit report revealed an additional debt that was not included in the
SOR. This debt reflects a charged-off automobile purchase that was last reported
delinquent in January 2014 and charged off. (GE 2) Explanations of the charge-off status
of this debt are not available.  
To date, Applicant has not addressed any of his outstanding debt delinquencies.
Nor has he provided any documentation of counseling, budgeting, or current financial
status. After briefly considering petitioning for bankruptcy, he decided against pursuing
this option out of concern for his clearance. (Tr. 28) 
Applicant assured that he still wants to pay his outstanding individual creditors. (Tr.
27-28). Without work, though, he does not have the resources to address them. (Tr.  29-
33) Currently, each of the debts listed in the SOR remains in delinquent status and either
unpaid or unresolved.
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements. Nor did he furnish any evidence of
civic or charitable contributions.
4
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the Ags, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
5
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to his diminished earnings during recurrent periods of unemployment.
Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
6
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s payment problems were mostly attributable to recurrent periods of
unemployment between December 2006 and October 2013. His financial struggles
during this span of recurrent unemployment continue to affect his ability to catch up with
his old debts. Applicant’s past financial problems merit partial application of MC ¶ 20(b),
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” Because Applicant has not been able to develop any track
record of repayment since his return to full-time employment, full application of MC ¶
20(b) is not available to him. Absent any evidence of repayment initiatives or efforts to
otherwise resolve his debts, Applicant may not take advantage of MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts,” either.
Applicant’s lack of any established payment initiatives, counseling, or payment
plans during periods of full-time employment preclude him from demonstrating the level
of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by the Appeal Board for
assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible
efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of any repayment actions to date with the resources
available to him from employment and unemployment benefits prevent hm from meeting
the Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No.
07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR
Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant failed to document any positive steps
taken within the past year to restore his finances to stable levels consistent with
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance.  For lack of any documented
payment initiatives, endorsements, or evidence of civic and charitable contributions to
assess Applicant’s overall trust and reliability, whole-person assessments are difficult to
form.  Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s payment history and
other features of his employment and personal profile, his actions to date in addressing
his finances are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
7
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.h:                       Against Applicant
-       C  o   n  c  l u  s  i o  n s         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
