1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)  ISCR Case No. 14-04398
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On September 30, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 30, 2014.  A notice of
hearing was issued on January 12, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 20, 2015.
The case was cancelled and rescheduled for March 20, 2015. Government Exhibits
(GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and
submitted Exhibits AX A through E, which were admitted into the record. The transcript
was received on March 31, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted half the SOR allegations and
denied half with explanations.
Applicant is a 59-year-old economist. He received his undergraduate degree in
1979, and his doctorate in 1987.  Applicant has been gainfully employed for the past 15
years, with the exception of three months in 2013, and two months in 2008. He believes
he had a security clearance in about 2008. (GX 1) He is being sponsored by his
employer from 2014. He is now employed with a private company.
Applicant is married and has five adult children. His wife has a medical issue that
prevents her from working. (Tr. 13) Her disease has caused many medical bills.  He did
not have health insurance at the time. (Tr. 20)
The SOR alleges federal tax liens, judgments, collection accounts, and
delinquent medical accounts  in the total amount of about $34,000 (GX 2) .
Applicant is in a payment plan for the 2010 and 2008 federal tax liens, which
amount to approximately $18,000. (SOR ¶ 1.a-b) He presented documentation that he
reached an agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) IRS. Applicant pays
$150 monthly for one year and then the payment will increase to $250 for the following
years. (AX A) He began the plan in April 2014.
Applicant’s reason for the federal tax liens is based on his contractual
employment. He receives a 1099 form at the end of the year and if he did not estimate
correctly on the amount of tax due, he might not have the money to pay the tax. (Tr. 41)
he acknowledged that he did not set aside sufficient income for the tax. 
As to SOR 1.c for a 2005 federal tax lien in the amount of $55,000, Applicant
denies this allegation. He states that this has been an ongoing issue with the IRS. In
1999, he was seriously ill. At the time he owned a company. In 2001 Applicant received
a bill from the IRS stating that he owed tax in the amount of $55,560. He had no idea
why this would be the case. He researched the issue and discovered that a broker had
sold stock from the company, unbeknownst to Applicant, and the proceeds from the
sale of the stock was charged to Applicant. Applicant contacted the IRS, but he notes
that he “dodged” it for years.  His attitude was “catch me if you can.”  (Tr. 18) He notes
that the lien amount is no longer listed by the IRS. (Tr. 18) He has no intention of
paying the debt. Applicant also learned that the broker had scammed other people. (AX
B)
Applicant has a payment plan for a state tax lien in the amount of $100 a month.
The current balance is $1,707.89. The first payment was made in November 2014. (AX
E) He notes that they take the money directly from his pay.  This was not listed on the
SOR. Applicant believes he owes them about $7,000. (Tr. 23)
3
As to allegation SOR 1.f, Applicant submitted documentation that he does not
owe any back child support. (AX D) He explained that his wife became angry with him,
and wanted him to pay child support for one of their own children who lives with them. It
is not clear but Applicant submitted another document from child support which shows
that he has a balance of $1,707.89, which will be deducted automatically from his
account beginning in August 2015. (AX C) However, a 2014 credit bureau report shows
a balance of $7,261 for child support. (Tr. 48)
Applicant’s attitude toward the credit card debts is clear. If he feels that he has
been treated rudely by them, he is not inclined to pay the bill. Applicant does not like
the ‘astronomical” interest that they charge. Applicant will not deal with credit card
companies. (Tr. 20)
As to the medical accounts, the bills are for  his wife’s medical treatment. He has
no excuse for not paying them and he knows he has a bad attitude. At one point, he
stated that he was not in a position to pay them, but he believes he could probably
make some arrangements. His wife hopes that she will receive disability from Social
Security and that her medical bills will be paid by them.  
Applicant was candid. He does not understand why his delinquent debts should
matter to the Government and prevent him from obtaining a security clearance. He
admits being negligent with credit card companies. If they are not willing to work with
him on his terms, they will not get paid. (Tr. 52 )
Applicant has a payment plan for a debt that is not listed on the SOR. He
acknowledged that he has no other payment plans for the delinquent debts alleged on
the SOR. He stated that he would probably try to arrange a payment for the debt in 1.n
because it would be stupid not to have that credit card. (Tr. 55)
Applicant did not admit or deny some of the credit card accounts. He does not
recall the accounts. He also noted that allegation 1.m and 1.r are duplicates. He
believes he has called some companies about a payment plan, but he does not know
which ones. He has not formally disputed any of the debts.
Applicant earns approximately $138,000 a year. His previous job paid about $66
an hour. He has about $585 in a 401(k) account.  (Tr. 60) He has a negative sum in his
checking account. He has no car loan. He has not sought financial counseling. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted he owes delinquent debt as reported in his SOR. He also has
other federal and state tax liens. His credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant would not pay some credit accounts because he thought that they
were rude when dealing with him. He has had this attitude for a number of years.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant has decided not to pay his wife’s medical bills because he
believes it is not fair. He has not acted responsibly during the past several years.
(FC MC) AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. Applicant took steps toward
resolving two federal tax liens. He is in a payment plan for a state tax lien. The
judgments, medical accounts, and other consumer accounts are not being addressed.
Applicant has the ability to pay but he wants to settle for less than the amount due. If
the credit card companies do not work with him, he will not pay. (FC MC) 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 59 years old.  He is an educated man. He has worked in a variety of
positions, but has not had long periods of unemployment. He admits that he when he is
capable of paying debts that he does. He stated that when he feels he cannot afford to
pay, he ignores them and hopes they will go away. He has not formally disputed any of
the debts. He just recently started the IRS payment plans.  The other debts on the SOR
have not been addressed. In addition, he has other delinquent debts.
Applicant has not met his burden to overcome security concerns under the
financial considerations guideline. I do not believe that he has acted responsibly. I have
doubts about his current reliability and judgment. Clearance is denied.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.r: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
