1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-03282 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
mitigate alcohol and drug security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation by the Office of Personnel 
Management, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance. DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated August 7, 2014, detailing security concerns for foreign preference under 
Guideline C, drug involvement under Guideline H, and alcohol consumption under 
Guideline G. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
2 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2014. He denied the foreign 
preference allegation (SOR 1.a), but admitted the 13 drug involvement allegations (SOR 
2.a to 2.m), and the 5 alcohol consumption allegations (SOR 3.a to 3.e). Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 5, 2015, and the case was assigned to 
me on January 12, 2015. DOD issued a notice of hearing on January 21, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for February 5, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered three exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 3. Applicant and three witnesses 
testified. Applicant submitted ten exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record 
without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through J. I left the record open for 
Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted one additional 
document, dated February 6, 2015, which I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as AX K. I received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 13, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  
  
Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed as a web developer for a 
defense contractor since February 2013. He is also self-employed providing computer 
support to customers. He is a high school graduate with some college courses. He is 
married with no children. He has no military service. (Tr. 11-12; GX 1, e-QIP, dated 
February 11, 2013).  
 
Applicant is a United States citizen by birth. In 2013, he applied for and received 
citizenship in the United Kingdom (UK) based on his mother’s birth in Scotland. He also 
received a UK passport. He never voted in a UK election, held political office in the UK, 
received any benefits from the UK, nor served in the UK military. He never used the UK 
citizenship to obtain any business or financial benefit, or performed any duty on behalf 
of the UK. His wife is a U.S. citizen, and all of his property is in the U.S. He turned his 
UK passport over to his facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 43-45, 87-88) Based on this 
information, Department Counsel withdrew the allegation under foreign prefeerence. 
(Tr. 134-135) 
 
Applicant admitted all of the drug involvement allegations. The SOR alleges that 
from January 2012 until at least July 2013, Applicant used an illegal drug ayahuasca 
leaf/DMT (SOR 2.a); that from May 2010 until at least January 2012, he used 
methamphetamine on multiple occasions (SOR 2.b); that from May 2010 until at least 
January 2012, he purchased methamphetamine on multiple occasions (SOR 2.c); that 
from May 2009 until at least January 2012, he used Adderall in excess of the prescribed 
amount on multiple occasions (SOR 2.d); that from March 1987 until at least December 
2011, he used marijuana on multiple occasions (SOR 2.e); that from March 1987 until at 
3 
 
least December 2011, he purchased marijuana on multiple occasions (SOR 2.f); that in 
January 2012, he received a written reprimand from his employer for failure to appear at 
work after oversleeping due to Adderall abuse (SOR 2.g); and that from February 1991 
to at least May 2009, he used cocaine on multiple occasions (SOR 2.h). It is also 
alleged that in May 2009, he was charged with public intoxication and possession of 
marijuana and placed on probation for three months (SOR 2.i); and in May 2007, he 
enrolled in a substance abuse program but left before completion of the program (SOR 
2.j). It is alleged that in October 1992, he was charged with possession of marijuana 
(SOR 2.k). It is also alleged that in 1991, he was charged with the delivery of LSD, and 
in February 1993, he was placed on probation for eight years (SOR 1.l). Finally he 
participated in a drug rehabilitation program from April 1991 to May 1991 (SOR 1.m).  
 
Applicant admitted all of the alcohol consumption security concerns. The SOR 
alleges that Applicant consumed alcohol with various frequency and sometimes to 
excess from approximately 1986 to at least 2012 (SOR 3.a); that in May 2007 he was 
terminated by his employer for becoming intoxicated on a business trip, had company 
property stolen, and lied about the incident to his employer (SOR 3.b); that in November 
2005 he pled guilty to driving under the influence and driving while impaired and was 
fined (SOR 3.c); that he was charged with public intoxication and placed on probation 
as noted in SOR 2.i (SOR 3.d); and that he enrolled in substance abuse programs in 
May 2007, as noted in SOR 2.j and in April to May 1991, as noted in SOR 2.m (SOR 
3.e). 
 
Applicant’s father was transferred around the world for his job, and the family 
moved every three years to many different locations. When Applicant was 14 years old, 
his father was sent to Saudi Arabia. There were no schools for English-speaking 
students so he went to boarding school out of the country. Since he did not have proper 
parental supervision, he went with the wrong group and started to abuse alcohol and 
drugs. By the time he was 19 years old and living in the United States in 1991, his 
parents had to send him to a rehabilitation facility. He voluntarily attended and 
completed the 28-day program. He did not know if his parents paid for the treatment or 
if it was covered by insurance. (Tr. 23-25, 47-48) 
 
Applicant continued to use and abuse alcohol and drugs. He did not attend 
another substance abuse program until 2007. In May 2007, Applicant was on a 
business trip for his then employer. He went to bars, drank heavily, and blacked out. He 
awoke in his hotel room and everything, including his business computer, was missing. 
He called his boss and told him someone broke into his room and stole all of his items. 
He called his wife and told her about the drinking, and she told him that he needed to 
take some action about his drinking and also to call his boss and tell him the truth. He 
called his boss and told him he had lied, had gotten drunk and had no idea what 
happened. He also said he would try to get into a substance abuse program. He made 
the second call to his boss about 20 minutes after the first call. He entered a substance 
abuse program. After a week, he determined it was similar to the program he attended 
in 1991. He did not think he was getting good results from the program and it was 
4 
 
costing him a lot of money. He was paying the cost himself. He left the 28-day program 
for financial reasons after only eight days. (Tr. 25-30, 48-50) 
 
Applicant admits that in 2009 he was arrested for public intoxication. He blacked 
out and awoke in jail. He realized that he could have had a bad accident and could kill 
someone while drunk. He vowed to stop drinking alcohol. Since May 2009, he has not 
consumed alcohol to excess. He no longer has the urge to consume alcohol beyond 
safe limits. Applicant still consumes limited amounts of alcohol on special occasions. 
There is alcohol in the house since his wife consumes alcohol. He continued to abuse 
illegal drugs, to include marijuana, Adderall, and methamphetamine. (Tr. 29-31, 50-51, 
69-70, 74-75) 
 
Applicant married in 1997. Over the course of their marriage, Applicant’s abuse 
of drugs and alcohol led to the end of the marriage. His wife was tired of his constant 
alcohol and drug abuse, and she left him in 2010/2011. He considered this a low point 
in his life so he consulted a psychiatrist about his addictions in November 2011. He had 
two sessions with the psychiatrist and one with his associate consultant. The 
psychiatrist prescribed an increase in his Adderall and an anti-convulsant medication. 
Applicant felt the doctor was only treating the symptoms and not looking for a cure for 
his abuse issues. Applicant tried to overcome his substance abuse problems by using 
traditional methods. He felt these methods were only treating the abuse issues and not 
the underlying discontent, melancholy, and self-destructive behavior issues. (Tr. 31-34, 
56-62) 
 
In December 2011, Applicant read an article in the National Geographic 
magazine about a drug called ayahuasca. The active ingredient in ayahuasca, 
dimethyltryptamine, is a Schedule I drug. He researched the drug and learned that it 
had a good success rate in treating depression and addictions. Since these were the 
causes of his alcohol and drug abuse problems, he thought the use of ayahuasca was 
worth a try. He either had to look at this drug or attend a very long and costly treatment 
program. The ayahuasca program cost about $2,000 compared to a traditional long-
term treatment program costing over $30,000. The use of ayahuasca had credibility with 
Applicant because the information came from the National Geographic magazine. He 
decided to take part in the cleansing ceremony held in Peru using ayahuasca. (Tr. 34-
38, 112) 
 
Ayahuasca is administered during a ceremony that lasts about four hours. A 
person attends the ceremonies for a week, and there are five ceremonies in the 
evenings during the week. In the ceremony, a brew made from the ayahuasca leaf or 
vine is ingested. Applicant does not know if there is any supervision from the Peru 
government on the preparation of the brew. The participants assist in gathering the 
material and preparing the brew. The result of drinking the brew is a euphoric feeling. 
Applicant had similar feelings when he was using alcohol and drugs. He does not feel 
he is substituting the brew and the ceremonies for his drug or alcohol use. He did not 
consult any doctors or professionals about the program before attending. He did his 
5 
 
own research and read material on his own. (Tr. 61-68: See, AX C, Editorial, 
International Journal of Drug Policy, 2012) 
 
Ayahuasca is legal in Peru but illegal in the United States. Applicant traveled to 
Peru from Texas in January 2012 to attend his first ceremony using ayahuasca. After he 
attended the program, Applicant felt completely changed and very different. He stopped 
using illegal drugs. He reports that he has not used illegal drugs since January 2012. He 
felt he had an exorcism where the self-destructive behavior left him. He felt content with 
himself and had no desire for self-destructive behavior. Since his participation in the 
program, he has not used Adderall or marijuana nor does he have any interest in using 
illegal drugs. He stopped associating with individuals that he knew used illegal drugs, 
and he has no interest in reestablishing contact with them. He does not attempt to hide 
his prior drug use but talks freely about it. Everyone knows about his past drug use. He 
and his wife reconciled and remarried in April 2013. She would not have remarried him 
if he had not ceased alcohol and drug abuse. He is willing to be subject to random drug 
tests. He considers himself a different person with no self-destructive behavior or a 
desire to use drugs or drink alcohol. Applicant is a licensed pilot and he could lose his 
certificate if he abuses drugs or alcohol. He is a steady volunteer for programs in his 
community (Tr. 38-46, 76-78) 
 
After his first ceremony in January 2012, Applicant decided he would participate 
in these ceremonies in the future. He vowed to help others realize the benefit of the 
program and help them attend ceremonies. He attended another ceremony in May 2012 
with a friend. He made a third trip with his wife in December 2012. He participated in 
each ceremony by ingesting the brew. Applicant made a fourth trip to Peru with a friend 
in July 2013 where sanango was ingested rather than ayahuasca. Sanango is a 
different brew made from hibiscus root but is in the same drug category as ayahuasca. 
Applicant attended the first ceremony for his own benefit. He stated that he attended the 
other three to help others. (Tr. 65-69, 72-74, 77-81) 
 
No medical professional advised him to make the trip. A doctor friend told him he 
might as well try the program because he had failed all other programs. He needed a 
very long rehabilitation program to overcome his addictions. He considers Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) to be a good program, but it is not right for him. (Tr. 57-58, 71-72)  
 
A program manager and the facility security officer (FSO) for Applicant’s 
company testified that he has worked with Applicant since early 2013. He is aware of 
Applicant’s prior drug use. Applicant is an excellent employee. He is very intelligent and 
works hard. He has never seen Applicant under the influence of either drugs or alcohol. 
He believes Applicant is trustworthy and reliable. He recommends that he be granted 
eligibility for access to classified information because Applicant’s demeanor and 
professionalism is outstanding. (Tr. 82-88) 
 
Applicant’s wife, a travel accounts manager, testified that she and Applicant first 
married in October 1997. Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and drugs put a strain on the 
marriage. She told Applicant that she would leave him if he continued his drug and 
6 
 
alcohol abuse. Applicant came home one day with methamphetamine given to him by a 
friend. She left him in March 2011 and divorced him in September 2011. However, they 
stayed in contact. After Applicant traveled to Peru to use ayahausca, she noticed a 
change in his demeanor. He was calm and at peace with no desire for drugs. She did 
not see any drug activity, and Applicant did not contact his former drug-using friends. 
Applicant told her of his experience in Peru. She was skeptical because it was not the 
normal type of drug rehabilitation program she experienced in assisting Applicant to 
control his drug use. She researched the ayahausca program and was surprised at the 
success of the program. She wanted to see the program for herself so she traveled with 
Applicant to Peru in December 2012. There were people there with various issues such 
as depression, anxiety, and substance abuse. Applicant’s wife was changed in a 
positive way by the experience. She and Applicant started living together again in April 
2013 and remarried in December 2013. She is confident he will never be involved in 
alcohol and drug abuse again. He is a different person and no longer has self-
destructive tendencies. She last saw him drink to excess in 2009. She believes he 
should be granted eligibility for access to classified information because he respects the 
law and obeys the rules. (Tr. 89-98)  
 
A post-doctoral research scientist at a major university medical center testified 
that he has master and doctoral degrees in psychology and training in behavioral 
pharmacology which is the effect of serotonergic hallucinogens-type drugs on human 
behavior. His area of focus is the effects of psilocybin.1 He has not done any research 
directly on the effects of ayahuasca. Ayahuasca is considered in the same class of drug 
as psilocybin. Ayahuasca is a brew made from the roots of two different plants by 
Amazonian medicine men for religious and spiritual purposes. The brew has the same 
psycho-active effects as other hallucinogens like LSD and psilocybin. Ayahuasca is 
considered in the same drug class as the drug he primarily researches because of the 
similar effects on the brain. Both can create very profound altered states of 
consciousness which some people find highly meaningful and spiritual or transcendent. 
(Tr. 100-104, 116-117) 
 
He has been studying the use of psilocybin to treat smoking addiction. The 
results of the study so far have been good. The studies have been small because the 
drugs are still classified as Schedule I drugs. The drugs may help with addictions 
because they cause the subjects to reprioritize the things in their lives. Their prior 
addictions may become less meaningful so they no longer want to engage in addictive 
behavior. There have been other studies that have looked at the effects of these types 
of hallucinogens on cocaine addiction, alcoholism, and poly-substance (many 
substances) abusers. There was a significant decrease in problematic drug use after 
administration of ayahuasca in group treatment programs. The only drug that 
ayahuasca does not seem to affect is cannabis. The studies also show that the more 
recovery capital the person has, such as good relationships, job prospects, and living 
stability, the better and longer the recovery. (Tr. 104-109) 
 
                                            
1 The witnessed Curriculum Vitae is at AX H. 
7 
 
The witness discussed with Applicant his history of drug and alcohol abuse. He is 
aware that Applicant used ayahuasca to overcome his addictions and that there is a 
remission in his problematic drug and alcohol abuse. Applicant’s experience is 
consistent with what the witness has seen from the present research and he believes 
from the data that Applicant has a greater than eight in ten chance of remaining 
abstinent. There is no chance that Applicant will become addictive to ayahausca since it 
is not an addictive drug. He does not know of any long-term effect from the use of the 
drug. There has not been enough study time to determine if and what the long-term 
effects may be. There is no research ongoing at this time on the effects of 
dimethyltryptamine, the active ingredient in ayahausca. (Tr. 109-113) 
 
The research shows that basically hallucinogenic drugs like psilocycin are safe to 
administer to people once they have been properly medically and psychologically 
screened, and the drugs are administered in a controlled setting like a laboratory with 
trained personnel administering and overseeing the drug use. He is aware the Applicant 
attended ceremonies using the ayahausca drug in Peru. He is not aware of any medical 
or psychological screening Applicant received prior to attending the ceremonies. There 
is a long-standing indigenous tradition of use of the substance in religious or spiritual 
settings. He does not know if there are any medically-qualified personnel that oversee 
the ceremonies. He cannot recommend for or against attending the ceremonies since 
there are many variables to consider, including no medical and psychological screening 
and no proper medical supervision. (Tr. 113-124)  
 
He examined the four articles sent to him and admitted as AX D, AX E, AX F, 
and AX G. He believes the articles are sound and well written. He agrees with the 
conclusion of the author of the article at AX E that “further clinical investigation is still 
warranted to assess the efficacy of ayahuasca for substance dependent treatment in 
comparison to current best treatment practices.” He also agrees with the conclusion of 
the authors in the Article at AX G that clinical studies would help determine the 
therapeutic effects of the potential therapy. The witness stated that the conclusion to be 
drawn from the articles is that ayahuasca therapy is not ready to be available to the 
general public for use in the United States. The witness agrees that further studies and 
research are needed to understand any relapse to drug-use problems in the first three 
years of abstinence and the long-term management of recovery. He stated further 
clinical studies on the anti-craving mechanism for ayahuasca are highly recommended. 
He also concluded that there is not enough understanding of how the drug works in the 
brain. (Tr. 124-131) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant presented three letters of 
recommendation. The first letter is from a medical professional who has known 
Applicant for almost his entire life. He knows Applicant has suffered from alcohol and 
drug abuse. He believes Applicant has made life changes to successfully overcome his 
substance abuse. He believes Applicant realizes his drug and alcohol abuse problem 
and has attempted to self-medicate to overcome underlying personal and psychological 
issues. The author believes that Applicant’s wife divorcing him was a trigger to help 
Applicant resolve and change his self-destructive behavior. Applicant did not find 
8 
 
traditional methods helpful in resolving his addictive problems. Applicant found non-
traditional treatment in Peru to be helpful for him. The letter writer opined that Applicant 
is now a completely different person. He socializes better, is happy, sober, clean, and a 
productive member of society. The author has no doubt that Applicant has made a 
lasting change to his life.  
 
The second letter is from his employer’s human resource manager. It was also 
admitted at the hearing as AX A. She writes that the Applicant is an exceptional 
employee with a work ethic and technical skills that make him a valuable team member. 
Applicant has always been on time for work and volunteers his time to support the non-
profit organizations the company supports.  
 
The third letter is from a fellow employee. The same author sent a similar letter 
that is admitted as AX B. He has known Applicant since 2008 when he was Applicant’s 
direct supervisor and hiring manager at another company. When he moved to another 
position in 2010, he encouraged Applicant to move with him. Applicant was hired by 
their present employer on the author’s recommendation. He saw Applicant’s substance 
abuse as well as his recovery. When Applicant was abusing both alcohol and drugs, his 
work never faltered. He told the letter’s author, who was his supervisor at the time, of 
his struggles with alcohol and drugs. When he hit “rock bottom” after his wife divorced 
him, Applicant sought treatment and found a spiritual answer to his problems. He has 
seen Applicant’s turnaround in his life. As Applicant started this process, the letter writer 
assisted him in his recovery. Over the last three years, Applicant has been a happier 
and healthier person. He has seen Applicant’s transformation and personal growth. 
Applicant now has a different set of friends and hobbies. The letter’s author has no 
reservations in recommending Applicant for a security clearance. 
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted a written statement that he will not use 
illegal drugs or become intoxicated by alcohol while holding a security clearance. He is 
willing to undergo drug testing and alcohol screening. If he uses illegal drugs or 
becomes intoxicate, he understands that his security clearance could be immediately 
revoked. (AX K)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
9 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, because it may impair judgment and 
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior 
altering substances, including drugs material and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Dimethyltryptamine, the active 
ingredient in ayahuasca, methamphetamine, cocaine, and marijuana are listed as 
Schedule I drugs. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
Applicant admitted abusing a large variety of illegal drugs, to include 
methamphetamine, cocaine, and marijuana, from 1987 until January 2012. Applicant’s 
drug use includes the use of Adderrall in a manner deviating from approved medical 
direction. He admitted to the purchase of illegal drugs and a failure to complete a drug 
and alcohol rehabilitation program. He admitted using another drug, ayahuasca, which 
is illegal in the United States but legal in Peru where he used it, three times in 2012. 
10 
 
Under these circumstances, the evidence is sufficient to raise the following disqualifying 
conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25: 
 
 (a) any drug use; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
I considered Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
For both drug and alcohol abuse, there is no "bright line" rule for determining 
when conduct is recent or sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a 
determination whether past conduct affects an individual's present reliability and 
trustworthiness must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If 
the evidence shows a significant period of time has passed without evidence of an 
alcohol or drug issue, there must be an evaluation whether that period of time 
demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.  
 
Applicant’s extensive knowing and willful illegal drug use is recent, frequent, and 
can recur. His long-term use of illegal drugs casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant demonstrated some limited intent not to 
abuse drugs in the future. He changed his environment by moving to a different part of 
the country. He executed a document with an automatic revocation of his security 
clearance for future illegal drug use. However, the major thrust to show changed 
circumstances and his intent not to abuse drugs in the future is based on his use of the 
alternative treatment methods of the drug ayahusaca. Ayahusaca is an illegal drug in 
itself. There may be some promise that the drug can be used to overcome addictive 
behavior. However, a careful review of the scientific literature provided by Applicant and 
the testimony of Applicant’s expert witness shows that the scientific basis to conclude 
the use of ayahausa will overcome addictive behavior for illegal drugs has not been 
scientifically established. The research is too new, not extensive, and uncertain. The 
authors of the scientific articles and the expert witness stated that more extensive 
research is required to know if ayahuasca can make a person have a changed 
circumstance or conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
11 
 
Applicant’s evidence in support of rehabilitation and changed circumstances is 
his use of the drug, ayahuasca, which is illegal in the United States. Ayahausca causes 
the same feeling in the individual as other hallucinogenic drugs. It is the use of an illegal 
drug to overcome the use of another illegal drug. Both the illegal drugs Applicant used 
for many years and his recent use of ayahausca can lead to impaired judgment raising 
questions of his reliability and trustworthiness to properly safeguard classified 
information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate his long-term 
illegal drug use.  
 
Guideline G Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)  
 
Applicant admitted that he extensively consumed alcohol with various 
frequencies to the point of intoxication from 1986 until 2009. He admits to being 
arrested for alcohol-related offenses including public intoxication and driving under the 
influence of alcohol. He also admits to employment issues caused by excessive alcohol 
consumption. Applicant’s extensive alcohol consumption is binge drinking. He attended 
substance abuse treatment for both alcohol and drug addiction, and left one program 
before it was completed. Applicant's admissions are sufficient to raise the following 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser  or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting to work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
I considered the following Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
12 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant abused alcohol for over 20 years, starting when he was only a 
teenager. He stopped consuming alcohol to excess when he awoke after passing out 
from alcohol consumption and realized he could have seriously harmed someone while 
he was intoxicated. From that point on, he states he has not consumed alcohol to 
excess. He does not attend any alcohol rehabilitation programs or aftercare. He states 
he has not consumed alcohol to excess in over six years, but he still consumes alcohol.  
 
The evidence he presented is not sufficient to show a change of circumstance. 
He may be able to now somewhat control his alcohol consumption impulses. However, 
since he still consumes alcohol and is not in any treatment or counseling program, he 
can relapse into alcohol abuse. The evidence shows that Applicant has not been 
reformed or rehabilitated, and he has not mitigated security concern for alcohol 
consumption. Applicant presents an unacceptable security concern based on alcohol 
consumption. Applicant has not established a pattern of abstinence and has not shown 
sufficient evidence of action taken to overcome his alcohol consumption problems  
 
Applicant cited two decisions by other DOHA administrative judges, AX I, ISCR 
Case No. 14-00143, (Aug 13, 2014), and AX J, ISCR Case No. 07-13294, (Dec 30, 
2008). Decisions by other administrative judges may be persuasive, but they are not 
precedential. I have considered both decisions and determine that they are not 
controlling in this case. Both cases deal only with drug abuse and not drug and alcohol 
abuse. There are also substantial factual differences in the frequency, length, and types 
of drugs used to make these cases irrelevant to the present case.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
13 
 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the opinion of 
Applicant’s wife, friends, and colleagues that he no longer abuses drugs and alcohol. I 
considered their opinion that Applicant is trustworthy, honest, and reliable. However, 
this information does not offset the significant information concerning Applicant’s 
extensive alcohol and drug abuse. Applicant abused alcohol and illegal drugs for over 
25 years. He used a drug illegal in the United States that supposedly cured his drug 
abuse. Medical information shows that the research on this drug has not been 
completed and that it is too early to tell if this is an effective drug abuse treatment. He 
indicates that he has not abused alcohol since 2009 but he still drinks alcohol on special 
occasions, and he is not in an alcohol treatment program. Applicant’s use of alcohol and 
illegal drugs indicates that he may not be concerned or act responsibly in regard to 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated security concerns arising from alcohol and drug abuse. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.f:  Against Applicant 
14 
 
 Subparagraph 2.g:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.h – 2.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.j:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.k – 2.l:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.m:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3: Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a- 3.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 3.e:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
