 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04004 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 5, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 18, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 3, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. An 
 
2 
 
objection to GE 2 was overruled and there were no other objections. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into the record without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE D, which was admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d – 1.f, 1.g, 1.i – 1.j, 
1.l, 1.n, 1.q – 1.r, 1.t – 1.u, 1.w, 1.bb - 1.cc, and 1.kk. She denied ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.h, 1.k, 
1.m, 1.o – 1.p, 1.s, 1.v, 1.x – 1.aa, 1.dd, and 1.ff – 1.jj. The Government withdrew SOR 
¶¶ 1.g, 1.k, 1.p, and 1.v.1 The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
this employer for about two years. She provides logistical support. She earned a GED. 
She has no military service and this is her first time seeking a security clearance. She is 
in her second marriage and has a total of five children from both marriages. She now 
receives child support from her ex-husband of approximately $400 a month for two of 
the children. Her first marriage lasted from 2004 to 2008.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 36 delinquent debts and Applicant’s 2005 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The total debt is in excess of $29,000 (exclusive of the withdrawn SOR 
allegations). The debts were listed in a credit report from January 2014.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose because of several reasons. First, because 
of debts incurred during her first marriage; second, after her divorce, she had difficulty 
making ends meet for her children as a single mother; and third, her ex-husband failing 
to live up to his responsibilities as set forth in their divorce settlement. She and her first 
husband filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 mostly because of the amount of debt her 
husband brought into the marriage. She divorced her husband in 2008 and some of the 
terms of the divorce were that each party was to pay fifty percent of a debt related to a 
broken lease (SOR ¶ 1.c) and each party was to share equally all medical expenses for 
the children. Her ex-husband has not fulfilled his obligations in this regard and she 
intends to seek judicial redress against him. Thirty-three of the SOR allegations are for 
delinquent medical debts. The status of the SOR-related debts is as follows:4    
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20. 
 
2 Tr. at 6, 30-31, 33-34; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 33, 69-70; GE 3; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (medical account- $102): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in August 2007. Applicant stated 
she contacted the creditor, but no resolution occurred. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (medical account $12,102): 
 
 Applicant stated that this debt includes expenses for her children and herself. It 
was assigned to a collection service in February 2010. She contacted the collection 
service, but no payment arrangement was worked out. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (collection account for unfulfilled rental contract $3,396): 
 
 According to Applicant’s divorce settlement, both she and her ex-husband were 
ordered to contribute fifty percent to pay this debt. She stated that her ex-husband did 
not contribute so there was no point in her doing so because the debt would still exist. 
This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.f, 1.h – 1.i, 1.l, 1.n, 1.s - 1.t, 1.w, 1.aa, 1.dd, 1.ff – 1.gg, 1.ii, - 1.jj 
(medical accounts $9,522): 
 
 These accounts were to the same health provider. The date of last action on the 
earliest of these accounts was in May 2007 and the latest was in May 2011. Applicant 
contacted the creditor and arranged to pay seven of the collection accounts, starting 
with the smaller debts. She paid SOR ¶ 1.s for $617 in October 2014. She paid SOR ¶ 
1.dd for $126, ¶ 1.ff for $49, ¶ 1.gg for $34, and ¶ 1.ii for $31 in December 2014. She 
paid SOR ¶ 1.t for $341 and ¶ 1.w for $243 in February 2015. She has paid a total of 
$1,441 to this creditor. The rest of the collection accounts remain unpaid. She did not 
present any formalized payment plan other than to say she was working with the 
creditor. These debts are partially resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j (medical account $938): 
 
 The date of last activity on this account was October 2007. Applicant has not set 
up payment arrangements for this debt. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 35; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 36; GE 2; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. at 37-41, 43-4650, 5254, 56; GE 2, AE A. 
 
9 Tr. at 39; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m (medical account $613): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in December 2007. Applicant 
claims she does not recognize this debt and cannot identify the creditor because she 
only has an account number. Since Applicant cannot identify this account, it is resolved 
in her favor.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o (medical account $467): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in December 2007. Applicant 
claims she does not recognize this debt and cannot identify the creditor because she 
only has an account number. Since Applicant cannot identify this account, it is resolved 
in her favor.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.q (medical account $387): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in May 2008. Applicant contacted 
this collection service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This debt is 
unresolved.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.r (medical account $374): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in December 2007. Applicant 
contacted this collection service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This 
debt is unresolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.u (medical account $335): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in May 2008. Applicant contacted 
this collection service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This debt is 
unresolved.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.x (medical account $205): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in September 2007. Applicant 
contacted this collection service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This 
debt is unresolved.15 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 40; GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 41-42; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 42; GE 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 43; GE 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 46-47; GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. at 47; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.y (telecommunications debt $193): 
 
 The last action on this collection account was in August 2012. Applicant has not 
made any payment arrangements for this debt. This debt is unresolved.16 
 
SOR ¶ 1.z (medical account $189): 
 
 This account is a duplicate account with SOR ¶ 1.w, which was paid. This debt is 
resolved.17 
 
SOR ¶ 1.bb (medical account $160): 
 
 This account was assigned to a collection service in October 2011. Applicant 
contacted this service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This debt is 
unresolved.18 
 
SOR ¶ 1.cc (medical account $141): 
 
 This account was assigned to a collection service in April 2008. Applicant 
contacted this service, but was unable to reach a payment agreement. This debt is 
unresolved.19 
 
SOR ¶ 1.ee (utility account $74): 
 
 This balance date for this collection account is September 2007. This debt is 
unresolved.20 
 
SOR ¶ 1.hh (medical account $33): 
 
 This account was assigned to a collection service in August 2007. Applicant 
contacted this service and found out that the collection service filed for bankruptcy and 
is no longer in business. This debt is resolved.21 
 
 Applicant stated that she has about $200-$400 of disposable income at the end 
of a typical month after paying all current expenses. As of the date of the hearing, she 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
16 Tr. at 47-48; GE 2. 
 
17 Tr. at 48-49; GE 2. 
 
18 Tr. at 50-51; GE 2. 
 
19 Tr. at 51; GE 2. 
 
20 Tr. at 53; GE 2. 
 
21 Tr. at 55; GE 2. 
 
 
6 
 
had $200 in her checking account and $400 in her savings account. She has a 401k 
retirement account with $3,000. She is current on her mortgage payment ($1,300 
monthly), her car payment ($330 monthly), her student loan payments ($55 monthly), 
and her federal and state taxes. She has not received financial counseling.22 
 
 Applicant presented character letters on her behalf from three friends and a 
coworker. They described her as dependable and trustworthy. They also commended 
her civic work with youth in the community.23 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
22 Tr. at 62-63, 65-68. 
 
23 AE C-D. 
 
 
7 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
8 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. She just recently began addressing her delinquent 
debts and the majority of them remain unpaid. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s divorce in 2008, her single mother status, and her ex-husband’s 
failure to provide financial resources as ordered by their divorce decree can be 
considered conditions beyond her control. She only began addressing some of the 
medical debts in December 2014 and has paid only seven debts with some of the 
smaller balances. Overall the record evidence does not support that Applicant’s actions 
were responsible under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Given the unpaid status of the 
SOR debts and prior bankruptcy, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Although she paid seven debts and contacted several other 
creditors, evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts is lacking. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply and ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant failed to supply documentary evidence to support her dispute of certain 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. However, as stated earlier, there are two debts that I 
found duplicative with other debts. Those I find in favor of Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. However, I 
also considered that she has only recently taken some action to resolve her financial 
situation. She has not established a meaningful track record of financial responsibility, 
which causes me to question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.g:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs: 1.h – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.k:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraph:   1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.m:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.o:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.p:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs: 1.q – 1.r:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs: 1.s – 1.t:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.u:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.v:  Withdrawn 
Subparagraph:   1.w:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs: 1.x – 1.y:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.z:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.aa – 1.cc: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.dd:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.ee:  Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Subparagraphs: 1.ff – 1.gg: For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.hh:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs: 1.ii – 1.jj:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph:   1.kk:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
