 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03822 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 12, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On September 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (e-QIP, dated December 12, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 2, 2014. In a statement, notarized 
December 16, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on January 
20, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on February 10, 2015. A response was due by March 12, 
2015, but as of March 25, 2015, he had not submitted any response. The case was 
assigned to me on March 30, 2015. As of the date of this decision, no response had 
been received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an associate with his current employer since March 2004.3 A 1994 high 
school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 1999 and a master’s degree 
in 2002.4 He has never served with the U.S. military.5 Applicant has never held a 
security clearance.6 He has never been married, but he has resided with a cohabitant 
since April 2002.7  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2009, when the 
national economic crisis negatively affected his business industry resulting in massive 
layoffs in his field. In December 2005, while he was working in his hometown on a 
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated December 16, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12-13. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 11-12; Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 30, 2014), at 4. 
 
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 44. 
 
7
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
temporary assignment, which he thought would become long-term, Applicant had 
purchased a residence for $114,900, with 80 percent or $91,920 for the first mortgage. 
He did so in anticipation of relocating to the area approximately 345 miles from where 
he was permanently located with his employer. Applicant’s sister moved into the 
residence and made the mortgage payments after his temporary assignment ended. In 
2011, Applicant’s sister moved to a smaller, less expensive residence, and Applicant 
unsuccessfully sought other renters. Applicant continued paying the mortgage for that 
residence in addition to his primary residence, and he started experiencing tremendous 
financial strain. He decided to sell the property. In 2012, he placed it on the market 
hoping for a short-sale. He received three offers, all of which were rejected by the first 
mortgage holder. The residence remained vacant for nearly eight months.8  
 
With no rental activity, little interest from any other prospective buyers, and 
unable to continue making his $850 monthly mortgage payments, Applicant stopped 
making those payments. By January 2014, he had an unpaid balance of $83,386 of 
which $14,742 was past due.9 The mortgage holder foreclosed on the mortgage, and in 
May 2014, the property was sold at public auction for $20,100.10 Applicant contended 
that the mortgage holder agreed not to seek a deficiency judgment against him, 
releasing him from any deficiency balance.11 Department Counsel argued that Applicant 
failed to submit any documentary evidence to support that contention,12 but that position 
is not necessarily accurate.  
 
The court record in evidence reflects that the property in question was described 
as a homestead residential foreclosure.13 The docket listing reflects, among other 
relevant actions, the foreclosure, the affidavit as to amounts due and owing, the final 
judgment, the certificate of sale, the certificate of title, the memorandum to disburse 
$20,100, and the issuance of the writ of possession.14 In the state in which the 
foreclosure and auction sale took place, the entry of a deficiency decree for any portion 
of a purported deficiency, should one exist, is within the sound discretion of the court, 
and must be reflected in the foreclosure order.15  Since the mortgage lender’s right to 
sue at common law to recover a deficiency was not addressed by the court in the 
foreclosure action, a potential deficiency action no longer exists, and Applicant’s 
contention is supported. The account has been resolved. 
                                                          
8
 Item 4, supra note 2; Item 6, supra note 4, at 3, 6; Item 1, supra note 1, at 45; Item 8 (Foreclosure File, 
various dates), at 8. 
 
9
 Item 4, supra note 2; Item 6, supra note 4, at 6; Item 1, supra note 1, at 45; Item 7 (Combined Experian, 
TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated January 9, 2014), at 5. 
 
10
 Item 8, supra note 8, at 7. 
 
11
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
12
 FORM, at 5-6. 
 
13
 Item 8, supra note 8, at 4. 
 
14
 Item 8, supra note 8, at 1-7. 
 
15
 Fla. Stat. ch. 702.06 (2014).  
 
4 
                                      
 
In addition to the first mortgage on the residence, Applicant also financed the 
remaining 20 percent with a second mortgage or home equity loan.16 When he was 
unable to continue making his monthly mortgage payments, Applicant also stopped 
making his second mortgage payments. By January 2014, he was past due $1,252.17 
When the mortgage holder of the first mortgage foreclosed on the mortgage and the 
property was sold at public auction, the second mortgage holder was a named party.18 
A second mortgage is generally subordinate to a first mortgage, and the interests of the 
second mortgage holder normally become a lien on the property. When Applicant’s 
property was acquired by the first mortgage holder and sold, the second mortgage 
holder might receive repayments if the first mortgage is paid off. Since the second 
mortgage holder did not receive enough money from the first mortgage holder’s 
foreclosure to satisfy the debt, it can sue Applicant for the difference based on the 
second mortgage promissory note. Applicant concedes that there is still a remaining 
unpaid balance, but indicated his attorney is in negotiations with the second mortgage 
holder in an effort to settle the account.19 Under these circumstances, and in the 
absence of any documentation related to either negotiations or payments, I conclude 
the account has not been resolved. 
Applicant has no other delinquent debts.20 His financial situation is stable, and he 
is able to meet all of his monthly financial obligations. Applicant’s financial problems 
appear to be under control. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”21 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”22   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
                                                          
16
 Item 6, supra note 4, at 6-7. 
 
17
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 8. 
 
18
 Item 8, supra note 8, at 1-2. 
 
19
 Item 4, supra note 2; Item 6, supra note 4, at 7. 
 
20
 Item 7, supra note 9. 
 
21
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
22
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”23 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.24  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”25 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
                                                          
23
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
24
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
26
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems initially arose in 2009 and continued 
for several years thereafter. In 2012, he was unable to continue making his routine 
monthly mortgage payments, and both his first and second mortgage accounts became 
delinquent. The first mortgage was eventually foreclosed upon, and the residence was 
sold at public auction. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”27  
                                                          
27
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all partially apply. The nature, frequency, 
and relative recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 2012 make it 
difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant’s 
financial problems were not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did 
not spend beyond his means. Instead, Applicant’s financial problems were largely 
beyond his control. The initial period of financial difficulty arose in 2009 when the 
national economy was plummeting, and there were massive layoffs in his field. His 
anticipated relocation to his hometown failed to materialize, and when his sister vacated 
the residence in 2011, he was unable to find renters. He attempted to sell the residence, 
but aside from three short sale offers, all of which were rejected by the first mortgage 
holder, there were no other potential purchasers. 
While the national economy has not fully rebounded from the depths of that 
earlier period, Applicant’s financial problems occurred under such rare circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Maintaining two residences for a lengthy period was 
more than his salary could sustain. With insufficient money to maintain his monthly 
payments, the first mortgage was eventually foreclosed upon and the residence was 
sold at public auction.  
Applicant’s attorney is attempting to work with his second mortgage creditor in an 
effort to settle the outstanding balance.28 With the first mortgage deficiency issue 
resolved, there are clear indications that Applicant’s remaining financial problem is 
under control, especially since he is current on all his other accounts. Applicant’s 
actions under the circumstances confronting him, do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.29 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
28
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
29
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.30   
     
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. In December 
2005, while he was working on a temporary assignment without any assurances that the 
assignment would become long-term, Applicant purchased a residence in his hometown 
for $114,900. He was subsequently unable to maintain making his monthly payments 
for his first and second mortgages on the property and stopped making his payments. 
By January 2014, he had an unpaid balance on the first mortgage of $83,386, of which 
$14,742 was past due. The mortgage holder foreclosed on the mortgage, and in May 
2014, the property was sold at public auction for $20,100. He still owes the second 
mortgage holder the unpaid balance of that mortgage. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, 
and he did not spend beyond his means. Rather, Applicant’s problems were largely 
beyond his control. The financial problems associated with the national economic crisis 
resulted in massive layoffs in his field. It also terminated his anticipated relocation to his 
residence. Applicant was able to sustain his two mortgages while his sister resided in 
the residence. Once she moved out and he was unable to locate renters, the financial 
burden began as he was required to make his monthly mortgage payments in addition 
to his rent payments. The burden was simply too great. Applicant tried selling the 
residence, but three short- sales fell through when the first mortgage lender refused to 
agree to the sales. The residence remained vacant for nearly eight months. Applicant 
worked with the mortgage lenders, and when he was no longer able to continue making 
payments, the first mortgage holder foreclosed on the mortgage and eventually sold the 
property at public auction. No deficiency judgment was pursued, and Applicant no 
                                                          
30
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
longer owes the first mortgage holder any money. He still owes the second mortgage 
holder the unpaid balance of that mortgage, but Applicant’s attorney is attempting to 
work with his second mortgage creditor in an effort to settle the outstanding balance. 
Since he has no other delinquent accounts, there are clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. His actions, under the circumstances 
confronting him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The entire situation occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur. 
This decision should serve as a warning that Applicant’s failure to continue his 
debt resolution efforts pertaining to the second mortgage or the actual accrual of new 
delinquent debts will adversely affect his future eligibility for a security clearance.31 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
     
  
                                                          
31
 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant, the decision, including the warning, should not 
be interpreted as being contingent on future monitoring of Applicant’s financial condition. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) has no authority to attach conditions to an applicant’s security clearance. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 
2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 18, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
