1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01604
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 23, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 7, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.)
On January 21, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on March 4, 2015. Applicant did not
submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
2
March 31, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 51 years old. She has never been married, and she has no children.
She is a professional graphic designer, and she was self-employed from October 2006 to
October 2013. Applicant now works as a sign painter for a defense contractor, and she
seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense
sector. (Items 4, 6.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists nine allegations (1.a. through 1.i.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The debts will be discussed
below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a.  This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a state tax lien in the amount of
$1,881. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, and she wrote that this
debt would be paid in full with her next tax refund. The record was left open until March
4, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit evidence establishing that this debt was paid.  No
evidence was introduced to prove that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that
this debt is still outstanding.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $283.  In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation. In regard to this
allegation and several other allegations, Applicant wrote that she has contacted the
debtor, and she  has set up a payment plan. (Item 3.) I have proceeded with the
assumption that she meant she contacted the creditor, since she is the debtor, and I will
use the term creditor where she has used debtor. No evidence was introduced to prove
that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $98.  In her RSOR, Applicant denied this SOR allegation, and she wrote that she has
a current account with this creditor and is paying “in per terms.” (Item 3.) The most
current credit report shows that this debt was paid for less than full balance. (Item 7.) I
find that this debt is resolved.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the amount
of $548. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, writing that she has
contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan. (Item 3.) No evidence was introduced to
prove that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged-off account in the amount
of $5,613. In her RSOR, Applicant denied this SOR allegation, contending that she did
not know the origination of this debt. (Item 3.) The November 2013 credit report shows
that this debt, which was a personally guaranteed business loan was charged off in
2009, at which time the account was closed. (Item 5.) 
In Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview, based on an interview conducted on
December 11, 2013, Applicant stated that she thinks this debt could be for a business
loan for a previous business. She indicated that she planned to contact the creditor and
make a payment plan to pay off this debt. (Item 6.) No evidence was introduced to prove
that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount of
$2,497.  In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, writing that she has
contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan. (Item 3.) No evidence was introduced to
prove that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $492.  In her RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation, writing that she has
contacted the creditor to set up a payment plan. (Item 3.) No evidence was introduced to
prove that this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $456. In her RSOR, Applicant denied this SOR allegation, contending that  items from
a storage facility were auctioned off to pay this debt this debt, and she was told that this
debt was paid in full. The November 2013 credit report shows that this debt has been in
collection since November 2008. (Item 5.) No evidence was introduced to prove that this
debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount of
$66.The November 2013 credit report shows that this debt has been in collection since
July 2013, for a returned check, and the recent credit report, dated January 21, 2015,
continues to show this debt is unpaid. (Item 5.) No evidence was introduced to prove that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. I find that this debt is still outstanding.
In Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview, again based on an interview conducted
on December 11, 2013, Applicant described her current financial status as having bad
credit and outstanding debts. She planned to get her finances in order after the first of
the new year when her probationary time from work would be over. She averred that she
is meeting her current financial obligations. (Item 7.) On her Security Clearance
Application, Applicant wrote that she left her self-employment position as a result of a
“business slowdown-laidoff.” (Item 4.) It was not made clear how she could be laid off
from her own business. 
No evidence was introduced by Applicant as to her current financial situation,
including her income and debts. Nor was evidence offered to show whether she will be
able to resolve her past overdue debts or stay current with her present debts. 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, which has not been satisfied. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
stated that she became unemployed because of a business slowdown, which occurred in
September 2013. No evidence was introduced to show that Applicant’s overdue debts
occurred because of this event. Also, since the evidence has established that Applicant
has only paid off one debt, I do not find that this mitigating condition is a factor for
consideration in this case.
AG ¶  20(d) is also not applicable, since Applicant has not “initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” as only one debt has been
proven to be resolved. Therefore, I do not find that this mitigation condition or any other
mitigating condition applies to this case. 
Finally, since Applicant has not submitted a Personal Financial Statement, nor
was any other evidence offered about her current financial stability, I cannot conclude
that Applicant will be able to pay off her past debts or keep up to date on her current
debts and expenses, especially if any new or unexpected debts are incurred. Therefore, I
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns, which
are found against Applicant. 
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are applicable, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1b.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c.: For  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d. - 1i.: Against  Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
