 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04405 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 13, 2012. On 
September 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 29, 2014; answered it on November 17, 
2014; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on January 16, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on 
January 29, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on February 5, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 24, 2015. I 
 
2 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but presented no witnesses or 
documents. I kept the record open until March 13, 2015, to enable him to present 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 10, 2015. 
 
At Applicant’s request, I extended the deadline for submitting documentary 
evidence until March 25, 2015. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
M, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding 
AX A through M are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits I, II, and III.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old applications engineer employed by a federal contractor 
since October 2002. He has held a security clearance since 1998.  
 
Applicant graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree in May 1994. He 
married in April 1995 and divorced in February 1997. He married his current wife in 
November 2004. He and his wife have an eight-year-old daughter. His wife has three 
children from a previous relationship, ages 17, 15, and 11, who live with them. 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling about $37,250. The evidence 
concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a, delinquent home mortgage loan ($11,024). This debt arose when 
Applicant’s car broke down and required expensive repairs. The cost of repairs caused 
Applicant to fall behind on his mortgage loan payments. His December 2012 credit 
bureau report (CBR) reflected that he was 180 days past due, in the amount of $15,106. 
(GX 3 at 10.) He and his wife sold the home for less than the balance due on the 
mortgage loan. He testified that they began making monthly payments of $97 on the 
deficiency immediately. (GX 2 at 19; Tr. 30.) In February 2015, he made a formal 
agreement with the lender to repay the balance in monthly installments. (AX A.) The 
document submitted by Applicant does not set out the amount of the monthly 
installments. However, his personal financial statement (PFS), submitted in response to 
financial interrogatories from the DOD CAF in June 2014, reflects monthly $97 
payments. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, medical bill ($460). This debt has been paid. (GX 2 at 13.) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d ($346) and ($295). These debts arose when Applicant 
stopped using a credit union checking account and deposited his paychecks with 
another institution. However, several automatic payments continued to be deducted 
from the credit union account, resulting in overdrafts. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is an 
 
3 
 
unsecured loan for the amount of the overdrafts, and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is the 
collection account for the unsecured loan. (GX 4 at 2.) The debts are resolved. (AX L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, medical bill ($82). This debt has been paid. (AX M.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2008 ($24,415). This debt 
arose when Applicant’s wife sued a former employer for wrongful termination and 
received a settlement of about $60,000 in 2004 or 2005. Her attorney told her that the 
settlement was not taxable. Relying on that advice, she paid off a car loan and some 
student loans. They later discovered that the settlement was taxable because some of it 
was for back wages. (Tr. 25-27, 36.) They were unable to pay the taxes due when they 
filed their return. The IRS filed a tax lien in February 2008. (GX 3 at 5.). In his response 
to the DOD CAF financial interrogatories, Applicant submitted evidence of an 
installment agreement with the IRS, providing for monthly $150 payments. As of May 
14, 2014, the combination of seized tax refunds and monthly payments had reduced the 
federal tax debt to $10,809. (GX 2 at 14.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g, judgment on delinquent payday loan ($628). Applicant satisfied 
this judgment in March 2015. (AX K.) 
 
Applicant’s June 2014 PFS reflected net monthly income of $9,465, expenses of 
$5,858, debt payments of $277, and a net remainder of about $3,330. Applicant’s net 
monthly income includes child support payments received by his wife for her three 
children. The PFS reflects the monthly mortgage loan payments and the IRS payments. 
Applicant has about $32,248 in his retirement account. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the documentary evidence submitted at 
the hearing, establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, and were 
not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the delinquent mortgage loan payments and federal 
income tax debt. The unexpected car repairs, bad tax advice Applicant’s wife received 
from her attorney, and medical needs of his family were circumstances largely beyond 
his control. Applicant has acted responsibly by remaining in contact with the mortgage 
loan lender, making payments under an informal agreement, and negotiating a payment 
to resolve the delinquent mortgage loan. He has acted responsibly toward his tax debt 
by negotiating a payment agreement and complying with it. He paid the other debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. Applicant has not sought or obtaining financial 
counseling, but his financial problems are under control. 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant has paid or made payment arrangements for 
all the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has held a 
security clearance for many years, apparently without incident. He has worked diligently 
to resolve his debts, and I am satisfied that he will comply with the payment agreements 
he has negotiated.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
