 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02562 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alex Peterson, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 9, 2014, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 18, 2015, setting the hearing 
for March 3, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified, called two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A through P, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and has worked for a government contractor for 13 
years. She holds a bachelor’s degree. She is divorced and has two adult children. From 
time to time, she provides financial support to both of her children. She has no military 
service, but has held a security clearance since 2002.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was delinquent on multiple accounts and used a 
company credit card to pay personal expenses. The debts were listed on credit reports 
from February 2013 and March 2014. Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, 1.h, 1.j, and 
1.l. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f- 1.g, 1.i, and 1.k (as being a duplicate account with 1.e).2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began because of several medical conditions 
affecting her health and ability to work starting in 2009 and continuing for years after. 
She also provided financial support so that her daughter could gain conservatorship 
over her father. She was forced to take long-term disability payments at about 75% of 
her normal salary after having surgery in 2009. In 2010, she was able to go back to 
fulltime work, but then her father became ill and she was required to care for him. Since 
she did not have annual leave built up, she was required to take this time off in an 
unpaid status. She underwent another surgery in 2012, which again required her to 
miss work in a non-pay status. Over the course of 2012, 2013, and 2014, she lost an 
average of approximately $18,000 of annual pay because of the unpaid time off she 
was required to take. During her security clearance interview with a defense 
investigator, she first became aware of the full scope of her financial problems and 
began to address them. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is a tax debt that resulted in a $283 lien. The tax was paid and the lien was 
vacated in April 2013. This debt is resolved.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 This is a debt based upon a voluntary repossessed vehicle in the amount of 
$9,789. Applicant returned the car when she could not make the payments because of 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 122-123; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 35-37, 40, 45, 83-85, 87-91, 93. 
 
4 Tr. at 60-61; AE F.  
 
 
3 
 
her loss of income due to her foot surgery. She attempted to contact the creditor to 
negotiate a settlement, but was told the account was charged-off. This debt is 
unresolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $8,482. Applicant settled this debt in 
June 2011. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $1,149. Applicant presented 
documentation showing that she established a payment plan to pay this debt and made 
the last payment in February 2015. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.k (duplicate of 1.e): 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $1,264. Applicant presented 
documentation showing that she established a payment plan to pay this debt and made 
the last payment in December 2014. This debt is resolved.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: 
 
 This consists of two telecommunications debts to the same provider/creditor in 
the amounts of $773 and $699. Applicant presented documentation showing she paid 
one debt and disputed the second debt. These debts are resolved.9 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.g: 
 
 This consists of six medical debts in the amounts of $175, $96, $96, $96, $90, 
and $55. Applicant could not locate the collection company holding the accounts. None 
of the accounts appear on her March 2015 credit report. These debts are resolved.10  
  
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 62-63.  
 
6 Tr. at 64; AE G.  
 
7 Tr. at 66; AE E, J.  
 
8 Tr. at 67-69; AE H-I, K.  
 
9 Tr. at 70-72; AE A (p. 16-17), L-M, O.  
 
10 Tr. at 73; AE A.  
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: 
 
 This is a telecommunications debt in the amount of $141. Applicant presented 
documentation showing that she paid this debt in September 2014. This debt is 
resolved.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: 
 
 This is a telecommunications debt in the amount of $136. Applicant disputed this 
debt. This account does not appear on her March 2015 credit report. This debt is 
resolved.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: 
 
 This is a medical debt in the amount of $118. Applicant presented documentation 
showing that she paid this debt in September 2014. This debt is resolved.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k: 
 
 This is a duplicate debt with 1.e above. This debt is resolved.14 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: 
 
 Applicant explained that she used her company-issued credit card for business 
purposes on several trips and then when she got back home she continued to use it for 
personal use not realizing it was her company card. When notified by her company, she 
stopped using her company card for personal use and has not used it since then. She 
keeps the card at work so she can’t inadvertently use it for personal use in the future. 
She paid the balance that was owed due to her personal use.15 
 
 Applicant testified that she currently has disposable income of about $300-$400 
at the end of each month. She has $53,000 in a retirement account. She received 
financial counseling from her bank. A coworker testified that she has worked with 
Applicant since 2003 and that she is a good performer and a truthful person.16 
 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 73-74; AE N.  
 
12 Tr. at 76; AE N.  
 
13 Tr. at 76; AE N, P.  
 
14 Tr. at 67-69; AE H-I, K.  
 
15 Tr. at 79-80. 
 
16 Tr. at 48, 53, 56. 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
 (d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts and used her company credit card for 
personal use. The evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). However, she credibly testified that her personal use of her 
company credit card was inadvertent. AG ¶ 19(d) does not apply. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent. She has paid all but one 
of the non-disputed debts. Since she has made a concerted effort to repair her financial 
position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they 
cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially 
applies.  
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent when she lost an average of $18,000 from 
her annual gross pay in years 2012-2014 because of medical conditions that caused 
her to go into an unpaid work status. This was a condition beyond her control and, once 
she was able to do so, she acted responsibly by contacting her creditors and arranging 
for payments. She was able to pay most of the remaining delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.  
 
 Applicant received credit counseling from her bank. She has made a good-faith 
effort to resolve the debts and contacted the creditors for SOR ¶ 1.b and ¶ 1.g, but was 
unable to work out a repayment plan or locate the collection company. She supplied 
documentary evidence showing her disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(c), ¶ 20(d), and ¶ 20(e) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s medical conditions that resulted in lost time from work 
without pay, which affected her financial status. I found Applicant to be honest and 
candid about the circumstances that led to her debts. She took action to resolve her 
debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find herself in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
