 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00345 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted all 12 allegations raised in the SOR 
and requested a hearing based on the written record. On February 19, 2014, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 10 attachments. 
Applicant timely responded to the FORM and submitted one document and a copy of 
the FORM with hand-written comments in the margins. The case was assigned to me 
 
 
 
 
2 
on April 9, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant 
failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
   
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old Help Desk Representative who has worked for the 
same Defense contractor for over a year. He has a bachelor’s degree. Applicant is 
divorced. His minor son lives with his ex-wife. Over the past decade, he has held a 
variety of jobs, including grill operator, deli associate, systems support technician, and 
desktop support. Most of his positions were full-time, except during periods of part-time 
employment (January to April 2004; July 2011 through May 20, 2012; March 2013 to 
August 2013) and unemployment (February 2010 to December 2010 and May 2012 to 
March 2013). The circumstances surrounding his periods of unemployment are vague 
and it is unclear whether his reduction to part-time work was volitional. 
 
 At issue in the SOR are a dozen delinquent debts amounting to about $23,000. 
Many date back to 2008. This includes medical accounts noted at SOR 1.d ($655), 1.e 
($318), 1.f ($221), and 1.g ($334), and student loan accounts at 1.j ($11,843) and 1.k 
($4,569). Many of these debts are noted as having been paid in full or in a consolidated 
repayment plan, but no corroborating evidence was submitted. There is no documentary 
evidence showing he has ever received financial counseling. Applicant has not offered a 
description of his plan or methodology for approaching and addressing his debts.  
 
The only documentary evidence Appellant offered with regard to debt payment is 
a letter concerning the medical debt noted at 1.f for $221. That letter states, in part, “[a]s 
long as funds have cleared, this shall confirm this debt as ‘Satisfied’ and you will have 
no further obligation to the above referenced account as soon as possible.” (Response 
to FORM, attachment) The conditional language of this letter fails to provide proof the 
account has been paid. Moreover, while Applicant provided some contact information 
regarding accounts he claims to have addressed, such verification is outside the scope 
of this process and the burden is on Applicant to show mitigation.  
 
The FORM, however, shows that four of the dozen debts have been paid. The 
judgment noted at 1.c for $445 is shown as satisfied at FORM, Item 7 at 1. The adverse 
medical judgment for $655 at allegation 1.d is shown as satisfied at FORM, Item 6 at 1. 
The $318 collection debt set forth at allegation 1.e is shown as paid in the October 2014 
credit report noted at FORM, Item 4 at 2. The child support arrearage for $741 noted at 
allegation 1.l is noted in that same credit report as paid. Consequently, about $2,159 of 
the approximately $23,000 at issue has been satisfied.      
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
 
 
 
 
4 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on about $23,000 in debts. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Four conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control, and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Much of the delinquent debt initially noted remains unaddressed. While periods 
of unemployment and possibly underemployment appear in his work history, the 
underlying circumstances are vague. He offered no nexus to show that the debts are 
related to such periods, to his divorce, or to whatever medical conditions led to the 
delinquent medical obligations noted in the SOR. His allusions to progress are not 
substantiated by documentary evidence. The four debts the record shows were satisfied 
appear unrelated to a specific debt reduction plan. There is no proof he has received 
financial counseling. As it is, the best that can be surmised is that about $2,000 of 
approximately $23,000 was addressed in some fashion. Applicant’s case is too deficient 
to find that any of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
 
 
 
 
5 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature, educated man, with a broad spectrum of work experience 
ranging from customer service and computers to culinary preparation. Over the past 
decade, he has moved between full-time and part-time employment with interceding 
periods of unemployment under ill-defined circumstances. He or someone for whom he 
extends financial support received medical care, but it is unclear what kind of medical 
care was provided, whether health insurance should have been involved, or whether the 
care was emergency in nature. Four of the dozen debts at issue have been paid or 
satisfied, but it cannot be fully discerned how or why these particular debts were 
selected, how they were satisfied, the circumstances under which they were acquired. 
All that is known is Applicant’s documentary evidence shows only nominal progress on 
the delinquent debt at issue, and, without more facts, can only be viewed as haphazard 
progress, at best.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all his obligations or satisfy 
all of his debts. It demands, however, that an applicant methodically devise a strategy or 
plan to address his debts in a manageable and realistic manner. It then demands 
documentary evidence that such a plan has been successfully implemented. Here, the 
evidence is deficient to find that the finance-related security concerns were mitigated. I 
find that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F.       
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c-1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
