 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00920 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G and 
Guideline J. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated August 18, 2014, Applicant admitted five of the six allegations 
raised in the SOR under Guideline G, and one of the two allegations raised under 
Guideline J. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on January 
12, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 18, 2015, setting the hearing 
 
 
 
 
2 
for March 5, 2015. That hearing was cancelled and rescheduled on March 9, 2015, for 
March 13, 2015, due to inclement weather. The hearing was convened as scheduled.   
 
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. The parties agreed to amend allegation 1.a to include the words 
“In February 2012” to specify the date of the incident described, and to amend 
allegation 1.b to read “3/16/2010,” not “4/16/2010.” [See Transcript of the proceedings 
(Tr.) at 45 and 51] Applicant introduced three witnesses and offered seven documents, 
which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. A-G. The transcript was 
received on March 23, 2015, and the record was closed.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old lead computer technician who has worked for the 
same employer in various positions since 1998. He graduated from high school and 
attended two years of college. Applicant served four years on active duty in the U.S. 
Marine Corps and for three years in the U.S. Army Reserve. He is the father of one 
minor child.  
 
One of the oldest of seven siblings, Applicant grew up in a “rough neighborhood” 
of a large city where many of his peers succumbed to the temptation to commit crimes 
or use drugs. (Tr. 36-37) Applicant did his best to rise above his surroundings, 
exercising sound judgment and being responsible. He went into the Marines Corps after 
high school, where he served with distinction. (Tr. 37-38) During this time, he met his 
life-partner of 15 years, with whom he has a teenage child. From the military, he went 
directly to college, then to work for his current employer, where he has held increasingly 
more challenging positions. (Tr. 38-39)  
 
Despite his achievements, Applicant had issues related to alcohol. In February 
2012, Applicant was pulled over by police late at night, after he finished a 15-hour, 
double bartending shift. He had not been drinking alcohol. He was administered a field 
sobriety test, which he believed he passed. He felt he was being intimidated by the 
officers in an attempt to cite him for resisting arrest. (Tr. 48-50) He was arrested and 
charged with Driver Failure to give Required Signal of Intention to Turn, Driving Vehicle 
while Impaired by Alcohol (DWI), Failure of Individual Driving on Highway to Display 
License to Uniformed Police on Demand, Driving Vehicle on Highway with an Expired 
License, Failure to Display Registration Card Upon Demand by Police officer, and 
Resist/Interfere with Arrest. To settle the matter, Applicant pled guilty to the lesser DWI 
charge. He was sentenced to 60 days in jail, of which 50 days were suspended, and 
fines and costs totaling $415. All other charges were Nolle Prosequi. 
 
On or about March 16, 2010, Applicant was pulled over after working a 
bartending shift. Applicant had not been drinking and he knew he had passed the 
sobriety test. Regardless, he was arrested and charged with Driver Failure to give 
Required Signal of Intention to Turn, Driving Vehicle While Under the Influence of 
Alcohol (DUI), DWI, Negligent Driving Vehicle in Careless and Imprudent Manner 
 
 
 
 
3 
Endangering Property, Life, and Person (NDV), and Operator Not Restrained by 
Seatbelt. Knowing there was no evidence showing he had been intoxicated, he pled 
guilty to NDV. (Tr. 55) The disposition of the case was probation before judgment and a 
fine of $165. All other charges were Nolle Prosequi.  
 
On or about September 2007, Applicant was cited for DUI after consuming a 
couple of beers. He concedes that he had consumed alcohol, but believed he was 
within legal limits (Tr. 57, 62-63) Applicant received a year of unsupervised probation 
and was directed to take 16 hours of alcohol education, which he did. This was 
preceded by a 2006 guilty plea for DUI which resulted in a sentence of one day in jail 
and a year of unsupervised probation. The SOR at 1.e cites to a 2004 DUI, based on a 
2009 interview in which Applicant referenced a 2004 DUI, but not a 2006 DUI. (Ex. 2 at 
1) There is no state record citing to a 2004 arrest or conviction. SOR allegation 1.e is a 
duplicate reference to the 2006 plea. 
 
In February 1996, when he was 20 and serving overseas in the military, 
Applicant received non-judicial punishment for DWI on a Marine Corps base. The 
following year, in April 1997, he was arrested for Public Indecency for urinating on the 
side of the road and no public facilities were in sight.   
 
Applicant admits he started drinking alcohol at the age of 19 while in the military. 
Until he was about 30 years of age in 2005, he would drink up to 12 beers at parties 
twice a month at parties. He then began moderating his use of alcohol. By 2009, he had 
reduced his alcohol consumption to “two to four beers once a month.” (Ex. 2 at 2) He 
had also ceased to drive if he consumed any alcohol. He has no intention to ever drink 
and drive again. He received alcohol education and has never been diagnosed with a 
drinking problem. Applicant is strongly motivated by the fact that another alcohol-related 
incident could lead to his being put “in jail for a long time.” (Tr. 66) Avoiding expenses 
related to reckless driving, such as legal fees, court costs, counseling, transportation, 
and the like is also a major motivator, as is the related stress these situations cause. 
(Tr. 73) He noted, “(I) try to stay on track, keep life simple . . . and these sort of things 
make that harder for me. So it’s then when I say that it’s been pretty stressful, it 
seriously has . . . So it’s like just that in itself is not something that I want to have to deal 
with on a daily basis.” (Tr. 73) He will not again put himself in a situation which would 
jeopardize his job.  
 
Applicant no longer works as a bartender at his old place of employment. (Tr. 67-
68) He no longer interacts with his old bar crowd. (Tr. 68) He now prefers to stay home 
with his family, infrequently bartending for additional income. (Tr. 68) He had no 
problem with total abstinence for six months while attending alcohol education. He 
described his present alcohol consumption as “infrequent,” noting that he only 
consumed alcohol at one event in 2015. (Tr. 70) His wife, a non-drinker, drove to that 
event. (Tr. 70) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)    
 
Applicant pled or was found guilty of multiple alcohol-related driving offenses 
between 1996 and 2012. This is sufficient to raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying 
Condition AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent). 
   
I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much 
time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
action taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)); and AG ¶ 23 (d) (the 
individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation 
along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program), none 
of which apply under these facts.  
   
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents at issue, a determination whether past 
conduct affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on 
a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a meaningful 
period of time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must be an 
evaluation whether that period of time demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.    
 
Here, despite his claims to the contrary, Applicant was ultimately found to have 
been intoxicated when he was cited for the February 2012 drinking offense. He takes 
responsibility for it and for the earlier incidents. Since then, he has established a record 
for both responsible alcohol consumption and driving that has been incident-free for 
over three years. He is older now. He spends more time with his family and less time 
around the service industry. His own drinking habits have progressively tamed with age. 
More importantly, he recognizes and fully appreciates the risks associated with another 
drinking and driving incident – risks ranging from incarceration, loss of employment, loss 
 
 
 
 
6 
of driver’s license, forfeiture of income for high legal and administrative costs, reverting 
at middle age to public transportation, and undue, unnecessary stress.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant is alcohol dependent. For him, to drink and drive 
or to drink to excess is ultimately a matter of choice. He has much to risk should he 
again be caught in an alcohol-related problem. He has no intention of suffering from any 
of repercussions poised to be inflicted upon him if he fails. He has a long history of 
succeeding in the face of adversity and for applying himself. Given the potential 
consequences, I believe Applicant has changed and these past few years evidence that 
change. I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns for alcohol consumption 
and that he will not present a security concern based on his alcohol consumption.   
 
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct    
 
The security concerns for alcohol consumption and criminal conduct are the 
same. The concerns involve questions of Applicant's reliability, judgment, and 
trustworthiness. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulation. (AG ¶ 30)    
 
Along with the aforementioned alcohol-related criminal citations, Applicant was 
cited for public urination nearly 20 years ago while in his early 20s. Taken collectively, 
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple 
lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless 
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted) apply.  
 
The criminal conduct mitigating conditions involve issues similar to those 
discussed under alcohol consumption. The issues involve the passage of time, the 
unusual nature of the action causing security concerns, the likelihood of recurrence, and 
whether the actions cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. The Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions that apply are AG ¶ 32(a) (so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training, higher 
education good employment record, or constructive community involvement). For the 
same reasons stated above under alcohol consumption, Applicant has mitigated the 
security concern for criminal conduct.  
 
       Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
 
 
 
 
7 
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s early 
struggles to succeed under difficult circumstances, and his years of honorable service in 
the military. I considered that Applicant has worked for his present employer, a defense 
contractor, for a number of years. I considered his commitment to his long-term partner 
and child, as well as his educational background. 
 
Despite a track record since youth of striving to better himself, Applicant’s early 
exposure to alcohol led to a decade or so of heavy weekend drinking. Since the age of 
30, his alcohol abuse has dissipated and turned him into a moderate drinker.  A string of 
alcohol-related driving incidents has left him at the point where another alcohol or 
criminal incident will be detrimental to his current life, work, and lifestyle. Applicant 
recognizes this. He is now at an age where he will no longer engage in risky behavior 
that might unnecessarily bring him stress. He is committed to moderate drinking and to 
not driving if he has consumed any alcohol. Applicant has faced multiple challenges in 
his life and succeeded. I am confident that he will continue his current pattern or 
responsible drinking and responsible driving, and continue to live life within the law. 
Consequently, I find that Applicant has mitigated alcohol consumption and criminal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
     
Formal Findings    
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:   
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT   
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f     For Applicant   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:      FOR APPLICANT   
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant   
 
        Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.    
 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
