 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00397 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
In a June 3, 2014, response, Applicant admitted, and provided comments, on the 
nine allegations raised in the SOR. He also requested a determination based on the 
written record. On July 18, 2014, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) that contained eight attachments. Applicant submitted no materials in response 
to the FORM during the time provided. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. 
Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.    
 
 
 
 
2 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old operations manager working for a Defense contractor. 
He has no military experience. Applicant has earned a high school diploma. He is 
divorced and has an adult son. It is unknown whether Applicant has received formal 
financial counseling.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are approximately $33,485 in delinquent debts, as noted in 
the SOR at allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.i. Applicant wrote that allegations ¶¶ 1.a ($2,109), 1.b 
($3,943), and 1.e ($3,162) are all the same debt, a judgment that is in collection by the 
same legal entity. He failed, however, to provide documentary evidence supporting his 
assertion.  
 
As for the remaining six debts at issue (¶¶ 1.c-d, 1f-1.i), Applicant notes that they 
are no longer on his credit report, as demonstrated on Applicant’s June 2, 2014, credit 
reporting bureau profile. (FORM, Item 5) There is no evidence, however, that they have 
been paid, satisfied, settled, or otherwise addressed. Indeed, in his May 31, 2013, 
interview, Applicant conceded that he had made no attempts to repay these debts. 
(FORM, Item 7, May 31, 2013, Interview) Moreover, delinquent debts are frequently 
withdrawn from a credit report for being stale, i.e., over seven years old. This action 
does not relieve an applicant of responsibility for the underlying debt.  
 
 Applicant attributed his acquisition of delinquent debt to his marital separation 
and subsequent divorce. For example, although the monthly obligations were ultimately 
reduced, he was initially left with only about $500 a month after child support and 
alimony. (FORM, Item 7, May 31, 2013, Interview) However, their divorce was final by 
February 2007, over eight years ago. No valid reasons are set forth with substantiation 
explaining why these delinquent debts remain unaddressed. Indeed, Applicant admitted 
that he had “ignored his delinquent debts due to tough times.” (FORM, Item 7, May 31, 
2013, Interview) Applicant failed to define the “tough times,” but did note that the 
delinquent debts included a hot tub. (FORM, Item 7, May 31, 2013, Interview) 
 
 There is no evidence as to the status of Applicant’s financial affairs in over a 
year. While three of the accounts at issue are labeled as “medical,” no information is 
provided as to whether they were for unexpected or emergency treatment. The written 
narrative offered by Applicant is highly limited, and his evidence is scant. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. . . .” See also EO 12968, 
Section 3.1(b) (multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth the security concern under this guideline 
as that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on nine debts, amounting to almost $33,500. Applicant dates their 
delinquency back to the period of his separation and ultimate divorce, which was 
granted eight years ago. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Four conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
The behavior at issue is recent to the extent there is no proof any of the multiple 
debts at issue have been addressed. What Applicant has done to avoid another period 
of distress in the future is unknown. There are insufficient facts to gauge whether he 
acted responsibly during his separation and divorce, although a debt for a hot tub tends 
not to indicate an inclination toward financial restraint. There is no evidence he has 
sought financial counseling, nor is there documented evidence he addressed any of the 
debts at issue. No financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant is a 47-year-old high school graduate who is divorced and has an adult 
son. Applicant places the origin of his financial problems on the events culminating in 
his February 2007 divorce decree. There is no evidence showing what he did to 
economize during that period, or what he has done since that time to prepare for 
another unexpected contingency in the future. There is no evidence he has received 
financial counseling. More importantly, there is no documentary evidence of efforts to 
address any of the delinquent debts at issue, nor is there evidence of a plan to address 
these debts in the future.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, demand that applicants articulate a workable plan to address their delinquent 
debts and show that their plan has been successfully implemented. Applicant failed to 
carry his burden in making such a showing, or to show he has addressed any of the 
delinquent debts at issue. In sum, he failed to mitigate financial security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
