                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-01918           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 22, 2014, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015, and was scheduled for
hearing on March 26, 2015. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of three
exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and seven exhibits. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on April 8, 2015.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file her federal tax returns for
tax years 2011 and 2012; (b) incurred an adverse judgment in January 2013 for $4,615;
and (c) accumulated 17 delinquent debts exceeding $25,000.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations, except for
the allegations pertaining to subparagraph 1.a (paid). She claimed she is paying $25 a
month on each of her remaining debts, which she intends to include in her planned
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Applicant claimed her delinquent debts are attributable to
her husband’s stage four cancer, and her resulting loss of income. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old communications tech II dispatcher for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married her spouse in September 1994 and has one child from this
marriage. (GE 1) She claimed no post-high school educational credits or military service,
but she is currently enrolled in classes in a local community college. (GE 1; Tr. 38-39)
Applicant has worked for her employer for the past two years without a security
clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 33, 37)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. (GE
1) She attributed her filing failures to medical hardships associated with her husband, who
was battling cancer. (AE B; Tr. 37-39, 50-51)
           Between 2009 and 2013, Applicant was employed as a police dispatcher for two
separate contractors. (GE 1)  During this time, her husband was diagnosed with prostate
cancer, which caused him to miss considerable days of work. (AE B; Tr. 37-39) As the
sole bread winner of her family, her husband’s inability to work placed added financial
strains to her family budget. (AE B; Tr. 37-39, 50-51) Applicant has since filed her federal
tax returns for 2011 and 2012 and has entered into an installment agreement with the IRS
to pay off the reported balance of $3,752 for both tax years. (AE D; Tr.41, 60) Under her
3
repayment plan, she is obligated to pay $50 a month to the IRS. She is current with her
federal tax return filings for 2013 and 2014. (AE F; Tr. 41)
During her husband’s illness, Applicant accrued additional debts. One of the
creditors obtained a default judgment against her in January 2013 for $4,615 in back rent
owed to her landlord. (GE 2; Tr. 44) Applicant disputes this debt but never challenged the
back rent claims in court. (Tr. 43-44) Another listed delinquent debt arose from a vehicle
repossession in 2012 and is listed in her credit report as a deficiency balance in the
amount of $16,280. (GE 2; Tr. 42) 
Applicant herself is a diabetic who experiences migraine headaches. (Tr. 51)
Before her husband became ill in 2012, she was able to pay her bills. (Tr. 51-52) In
January 2012, she entered into a retainer agreement with a legal firm, but deferred any
decision on petitioning for bankruptcy relief while she assessed her husband’s health and
prospects for recovery. (AE F; Tr. 40) Most likely, she will proceed to seek Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief, an option she believes will afford her the best chance to create “a fresh
start.” (Tr. 40) But before making this decision, she will make every effort to contact her
creditors. (Tr.  39-40, 52-54) Only if she is unable to reach payment agreements with her
creditors will she undertake to file for bankruptcy relief.
At this time, it is unclear what payment arrangements Applicant is prepared to
make with her individual creditors. She has no documented creditor contacts or  payment
arrangements with her listed creditors, and it is uncertain whether she will be able to work
out payment agreements with her creditors before seeking Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief.
(Tr. 56-58)  All of her listed creditors remain unpaid and unresolved. With her limited
income and modest disability benefits of her husband ($733 a month), no inferences can
be drawn at this point as to how Applicant will choose to resolve her debts.  
Endorsements
Applicant’s security manager values Applicant’s integrity and trustworthiness. (AE
C) He credited her with consistently displaying the utmost integrity in her duties while
dealing with sensitive information and material. Based on his observations of her actions
over the previous 27 months, he vouched for her integrity and trustworthiness. (AE C)
                       
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
4
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
5
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to her diminished earnings following her husband’s cancer diagnosis
in 2012 and ensuing loss of spousal income. Applicant has been the principal provider
in her home since her husband became ill and has limited means to cover her
household expenses and still address her debts. Applicant’s actions warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s payment problems were mostly attributable to her husband’s
becoming ill and unable to contribute more than modest disability benefits to the family’s
finances. Since being diagnosed with cancer, Applicant’s husband has been unable to
6
work and is limited to his disability benefits. Applicant’s mounting financial burdens have
continued to affect her ability to catch up with her old debts. Her past financial problems
merit partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Because Applicant has not developed any meaningful payment plan or other
means for resolving her remaining debts since her husband became ill, full application
of MC ¶ 20(b) is not available to her. Absent any evidence of repayment initiatives or
efforts to otherwise resolve her remaining debts by bankruptcy petition or other legal
means, Applicant may not take advantage of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
To date, Applicant has not followed up with contacts of her creditors and has
resisted proceeding with her petitioning for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. Prospects for
doing so in the foreseeable future, given her track record to date, are difficult to gauge.
Currently, she lacks any established payment initiatives, counseling, or payment plans
to assist her in addressing her debts. 
Without more tangible resources and initiatives to work with, Applicant cannot
demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by
the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify her poor financial
condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No.
08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of any repayment actions to
date with the resources available to her prevent her from meeting the Appeal Board’s
requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd.
May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant failed to document any positive steps
taken within the past three years to restore her finances to stable levels consistent with
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. While she is well regarded by
her supervisor and has demonstrated reliability and trustworthiness in her work, she has
failed to demonstrate progress in addressing her listed debts consistent with meeting
overall requirements for holding a security clearance. Whole-person assessment, while
helpful to Applicant, is not enough to overcome her lack of a payment track history over
the past three years since her husband became ill.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s payment history and
other features of her employment and personal profile, her actions to date in addressing
her finances are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing her finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.c through 1.u of Guideline F. Favorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to subparagraphs 1.a-1.b. 
7
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.c-1.u:                       Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.a-1.b:      For Applicant
-       C  o   n  c  l u  s  i o  n s         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
