The record  consists of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, and hearing exhibit (HE) I.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
 
                                                                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
      )
XXXXXXX, Xxxxx Xxxxxxxxx )      ISCR Case No. 14-03078
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 12 November 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an SOR to
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.2
Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 4 March 2015, and I
convened a hearing 8 April 2015. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 16 April 2015.
2
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. She is a 61-year-old facilities support
lead, employed as a defense contractor since June 2002. She seeks to retain the
clearance she obtained in December 2003. It appears that she requires a clearance
solely for access to the military base where her employment is located.
     The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (GE 1-2) establish, and Applicant admits 13
delinquent accounts totaling over $25,000. The 13 delinquent accounts consist of
unpaid medical debts, unpaid credit card debts, a co-signed automobile loan, and two
unpaid parking tickets. Overall, seven of the delinquent debts are each less than $500;
two are each less than $400, two are each less than $200, and two are each less than
$100. One debt is less than $1,000. Only four of the debts are more than $1,000 each,
and three of those are less than $2,000 each. The largest debt (SOR 1.k) is for a
repossessed automobile on which she co-signed the note for her son.
Applicant listed one delinquent debt on her March 2014 clearance application
(GE 1), corresponding to SOR 1.k—the automobile note she co-signed for her son.
Applicant traces her financial problems to about 2009, when her husband saw a decline
in his income due to the recession. He later lost his job in 2010 or 2011, and was
unemployed or underemployed until April 2014, when he got his old job back.
Applicant’s financial troubles are such that they live with one of her sons, because she
and her husband cannot afford to rent their own place.
 
In her Answer, Applicant stated her plan to resolve her debts through bankruptcy.
However, she had not filed for bankruptcy protection by the hearing date because she
had not been able to save the required filing fee. She does not appear to have any
reasonable prospect of accumulating those funds for the foreseeable future. She has
not otherwise been in contact with any of her creditors to discuss resolution of the
debts.
Applicant has not documented any financial or credit counseling. She presented
no budget showing her current financial status. She provided no work or character
references.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;3
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that4
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and5
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;6
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
3
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems date
back to at least 2009. She not only lacks the means to address her debts, she lacks the
means to even address them by filing for bankruptcy protection.  Applicant appears to3
not comprehend the seriousness of her financial situation or the means of obtaining no-
cost or low-cost financial assistance. Thus, it seems unlikely she can resolve her
financial problems in the near future.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
Her financial difficulties are recent and frequent. The circumstances that lead to her
financial problems, while beyond her control, are certainly common and she failed to
establish they are unlikely to recur.  Furthermore, Applicant cannot be considered to4
have acted responsibly in addressing the debts, because the debts have lingered for
many years without resolution or good faith efforts toward resolution.  Further, Applicant5
has not undertaken any effort to address her debts, either by communicating with her
creditors or by accumulating the necessary funds to proceed with a bankruptcy petition.6
Finally, Applicant has undertaken no financial or credit counseling to insure that her
finances do not become a problem in the future.  7
4
 
The concern with Applicant is that she currently lacks the funds to either resolve
her debts directly with her creditors or through bankruptcy protection. Thus, her
delinquent debts seem incapable of resolution in the foreseeable future. Even less likely
is Applicant’s demonstrating that she is capable of living within her means. Further, she
presented no evidence to help establish a “whole-person” analysis supporting a
favorable clearance action. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-m: Against Applicant
Conclusion  
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
