 Exhibit 4 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-02947
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. The security concern stemming from her
illegal drug involvement (using and buying marijuana during the years of 1996–2013) is
not mitigated. Accordingly, this case is decided against  Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on July 12, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
(DOD),  on October 23, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board6
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n. 1. 7
 W avier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or8
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and
the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009).th
2
it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the3
reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline H for drug
involvement. Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2014. Neither Applicant
nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.4
On January 27, 2015, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material
information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material5
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on February 6, 2015. Applicant did
not reply within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on
April 27, 2015.   
Ruling on Evidence
Exhibit 5 is a report of investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of
Applicant. The document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted on
August 12, 2013. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is
authenticated by a witness.  Here, Exhibit 5 is not authenticated in any way. Although6
Applicant, who is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am
raising it sua sponte. With that said, it is evident that Department Counsel is acting in
good faith, having highlighted the issue in the file of relevant material.  Nevertheless,7
Applicant’s lack of response to the FORM does not amount to a knowing waiver of the
rule.  Accordingly, Exhibit 5 is not admissible and I have not considered it.8
 Exhibit 4. 9
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to10
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.11
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security
clearance. Her educational background includes a bachelor’s degree awarded in 2001.
She has never married. She is employed as an accountant for a security monitoring
company. She began that employment in January 2012.
About seven months later in July 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance
application.  In response to questions concerning illegal drug activity, she disclosed9
using and purchasing marijuana during the years of 1996–2013.
Concerning the use of marijuana, Applicant stated that she used marijuana from
November 1996 to June 2013. She stated that her frequency of use was chronic for
several years, but was occasional (may be once or twice a month) during the last two
years. She also stated that more than once during this period she would abstain for
periods of one to two years. She further stated that her marijuana use never occurred
before or during working hours and she never reported to work under the influence.
Concerning the purchase of marijuana, Applicant stated that she bought small
amounts of marijuana from November 1996 to June 2013. She stated that she bought
the marijuana, solely for her personal use, on an infrequent basis (generally every two
to three months). 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted using and purchasing marijuana
from November 1996 to June 2013. She did not provide additional information or details
about her illegal drug involvement. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As10
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt11
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 18
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).19
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.20
4
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An12
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  13
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting14
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An15
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate16
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme17
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it20
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶ 25(a) and ¶ 25(c). Concerning Guideline H, in an October 24, 2014 memorandum, the Director of21
National Intelligence reaffirmed that the disregard of federal law concerning use, sale, or manufacture of
marijuana is relevant in national security determinations regardless of changes to state laws concerning
marijuana use. 
 AG ¶ 24(b). 22
 AG ¶ 26(a)–(d).23
5
Discussion
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement (using and purchasing marijuana) is
disqualifying under Guideline H.  The evidence shows she engaged in drug abuse  by21 22
using marijuana on a periodic basis during the years of 1996–2013, a 16-year period.
And she used and bought marijuana as recently as June 2013, which was about six
months after beginning her job with a security monitoring company and about a month
before she submitted her security clearance application. Presumably, her employer has
a drug-free workplace policy, as is the regular course of business for a company doing
business with the Defense Department. Her drug abuse reflects negatively on her
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow laws, rules, and
regulations.   
There are four mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H, although only
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case.  I considered both,23
and they are not sufficient to mitigate the security concern. The mitigating condition in
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply in Applicant’s favor, because her drug abuse was not so long
ago and was not so infrequent that it is no longer a concern. The mitigating condition in
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply in Applicant’s favor, because she did not present sufficient
evidence to demonstrate an intent not to abuse marijuana in the future. For example,
she did not submit evidence of negative drug tests to confirm that she has abstained
from marijuana use since June 2013. And she did not submit a signed statement of
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation. 
Applicant’s last known involvement with marijuana occurred more than 18
months ago in June 2013. But that is not an appropriate period of abstinence in light of
her overall record of using and buying marijuana during a 16-year period, which at times
consisted of chronic use. Granted, she receives credit for disclosing her illegal drug
involvement during the security clearance process. By doing so, she did what is
expected of a person seeking access to classified information. Nevertheless, it is not
enough to resolve the security concern.   
Because Applicant chose to have her case decided without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate her demeanor. Limited to the written record, I am unable to assess
Applicant’s sincerity, candor, or truthfulness. She also chose not to respond to the
FORM with relevant and material facts about her  circumstances, which may have
helped to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).24
6
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement justifies current doubt about her
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept.  I also weighed the24
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude she did not meet her
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information.   
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
