KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  Neither is his disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03133.a1
DATE: 04/08/2015
DATE: April 8, 2015
In Re:
-------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03133
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 20, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On January 20, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
2
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor, having begun his employment in 2013.  He served
in the U.S. military from 2002 to 2012.  Applicant was married to his previous wife from 2005 to
2008, with whom he had a child.  He has two other children from his current marriage.  Applicant
has held a security clearance from 2001 until 2011 without incident.
Applicant’s SOR contains a single allegation, that he has a child support arrearage in the
amount of nearly $21,000.  Applicant attributed this problem to the ten months of unemployment
he experienced after leaving he military.  He stated that he was in the process of hiring an attorney
to assist him in resolving the issue.  
While Applicant was in the military, he was the subject of a proceeding to determine if he
should be retained on active duty.  Upon the advice of a Judge Advocate, Applicant waived his
entitlement to an administrative board, submitting a “resignation in lieu of elimination.”  Decision
at 3.  Applicant had planned to join the National Guard but learned that his resignation made him
ineligible.  He is seeking a correction to his military records to enable him to serve in the Guard. 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he had not been making his monthly child support
payments.  He estimated his arrearage at about $36,000.  He stated that he does not have a good
relationship with his ex-wife and that the two have virtually no contact with each other.  Although
he has not formally retained the lawyer with whom he has spoken, this person did advise Applicant
to set aside some money for child support payments.  
While he was in the military, Applicant deployed to an overseas location for a year.  He
believes that this led to the breakup of his marriage, although he had separated from his wife prior
to his deployment.  In the military, Applicant was earning about $91,000 annually.  He currently
makes around $52,000 and his wife earns about $24,000.  
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his honesty, dedication, and work ethic.  He
submitted a number of letters supporting his effort to join the National Guard.  He received a
commendation medal and campaign med while in the military, along with other personal and unit
decorations.
The Judge’s Analysis
3
The Judge found Applicant’s child support delinquencies to be “ongoing and significant.”
Id. at 6.  Though noting Applicant’s unemployment, which was a circumstance outside his control,
the Judge concluded that Applicant had not acted responsibly in regard to his debt.  He stated,
“[Applicant] has taken no meaningful steps to resolve this financial problem since obtaining his
current job.  He has failed to show that his financial problems are being resolved and will not recur.”
Id.  The Judge cited to Applicant’s character references and other evidence favorable to him but
concluded that this evidence was outweighed by his lack to attention to his child support obligations.
Accordingly, the Judge concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the security concern arising from
his child support debt.
Discussion  
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, arguing that the Judge did not consider it.  He
disagrees with the weight that the Judge assigned to his child support difficulties relative to his
character evidence.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  Neither is his disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00631 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 13, 2015).  Applicant
argues that without a clearance he will not be able to keep his job.  However, we are not permitted
to consider the impact that an adverse decision may have upon an applicant.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 13-00546 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 2, 2013).  The Judge’s decision is sustainable on this record.
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal BoardKEYWORD: Guideline F
