1
  
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02867
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on May 8, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 24, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Item 5.1
Item 5.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on October 28, 2014. She submitted a notarized,
written response to the SOR allegations dated November 10, 2014, and she requested
a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on February 18, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on
February 23, 2015. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted a response dated
March 16, 2015. DOHA assigned this case to me on March 30, 2015. The Government
submitted eight exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-8 and admitted into the
record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked as Item 4, and the SOR has
been marked as Item 1. Her written response to the FORM is admitted into the record
as Applicant Exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of
the SOR. Her admission is incorporated herein as findings of fact. She also provided
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 39 years old, works as a senior systems engineer for a DOD
contractor. She has been employed with her current employer for eight years. Applicant
attended college in the Netherlands from 1994 until 2000, when she graduated with a
master’s degree. The record lacks any evidence of disciplinary action by her employer
or any violation of security or proprietary rules and procedures.1
Applicant was born in the United States to parents who, at the time of her birth,
were citizens of the Netherlands residing in the United States. Applicant has held dual
citizenship with the United States and the Netherlands since birth. Applicant attended
schools and college in the Netherlands, where she was raised. Applicant’s mother and
one sister are citizens and residents of the Netherlands. Her father is a citizen of the
Netherlands and a resident of Germany as of 2013. Her other sister is a citizen of the
Netherlands, residing in the United Kingdom. Applicant indicated on her e-QIP that she
travels to the Netherlands at least once a year to visit her family.2
Applicant returned to the United States to live and work after the completion of
college in 2000. In November 2003, she married. Her husband is a United States citizen
by birth. They have three children, who are citizens of the United States by birth and
reside in the United States. Applicant’s daughters are nine and six years old and her
son is two years old. Although born in the United States, Applicant registered the birth of
Item 5.3
Items 5, 6, and 8.4
Item 8.5
AE A.6
3
her children in the Netherlands to obtain citizenship for them. Her children are dual
citizens of the United States and the Netherlands.3
Applicant holds a passport from the United States and the Netherlands. When
she received her security clearance in 2008, she provided her Netherlands passport to
her facility security officer (FSO). On April 19, 2013, Applicant requested her
Netherlands passport from her FSO. She renewed the Netherlands passport on June 5,
2013, and it will expire in June 2018. During her personal subject interview on July 1,
2013, Applicant advised the investigator that she asked for her Netherlands passport in
order to register the birth of her son and obtain citizenship in the Netherlands for him.
She has not returned the Netherlands passport to her FSO nor is she willing to give up
her citizenship with the Netherlands.4
Applicant provided a copy of her United States and Netherlands passports. Her
United States passport is valid until July 2017 and shows travel stamps for trips
primarily to the Netherlands. Her Netherlands passport does not contain any entry or
exit stamps from any country. During her personal subject interview Applicant advised
that, in the past, she used a Netherlands passport for travel to other countries with her
family living in the Netherlands.5
In her post-hearing submission, Applicant asserts that her loyalty and preference
to the United States is shown by her decision to move to the United States away from
her family and to remain in the United States. She states that she owns property in the
United States; that her assets are in the United States; and that her immediate family is
in the United States. She does pay $10 a month for health insurance in the Netherlands,
as all citizens of the Netherlands are required to do so.6
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
4
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
5
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country;
Applicant holds a passport from the Netherlands, and she pays for medical
insurance in the Netherlands because citizens of the Netherlands are required to do so.
A security concern is raised under AG ¶ 10(a)(1) and (3).
The Foreign Preference guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 11(a) through ¶
11(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and,
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
I have considered the above mitigating conditions and conclude that none of
them apply because Applicant intends to retain her citizenship in the Netherlands and to
maintain possession of her foreign passport. I recognize that she is not currently using
her Netherlands passport for travel, but her decision to retain possession of the
passport raises a concern about her future intent regarding this passport.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
6
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is
a citizen of the United States as she was born in this country. Because her parents were
citizens of the Netherlands at the time of her birth, she also became a citizen of the
Netherlands. She was raised in the Netherlands, where her parents lived. After finishing
college, she decided to return to the United States and has lived in the United States for
more than 12 years. Her husband is a United States citizen by birth and resides in the
United States. Her three children are citizens of the United States by birth and reside in
the United States. Applicant decided to obtain citizenship for her children in the
Netherlands. They are now dual citizens of the United States and the Netherlands. Her
decision to obtain dual citizenship for her children and to retain her passport from the
Netherlands raises a concern about her preference for the Netherlands over the United
States. Applicant has many connections in the United States and in the Netherlands.
She does not appear to have separated the two, making it difficult mitigate the security
concerns raised by her decisions.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign
preference under Guideline C.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
