 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04563 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, but he did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued an undated Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant that was forwarded to him on October 10, 2014. The SOR detailed 
security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and H (drug involvement). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 9, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on December 29, 2014. On January 12, 2015, a complete copy of the file 
 
2 
 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 11, 2015. As of April 23, 
2015, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM (Items 4-6) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2012. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was 
awarded in 2012. As of March 2014, he was unmarried without children.1   
 
 Applicant graduated high school in 2008. He smoked marijuana on one occasion 
that summer with some friends. He started college in the fall of 2008. During his first 
semester, he smoked marijuana on one occasion with some fellow college students.2   
 
 Applicant obtained a job with a defense contractor in 2011, and he submitted a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in July 2011.3 He answered “No” 
to all the drug questions, including Section 23a, which asked:  
 
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.) narcotics 
(opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, 
speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstacy, ketamine, etc.) depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, 
PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.) or prescription 
drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a controlled substance includes 
injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise 
consuming any controlled substance.4   
 
 Applicant was granted a DOD security clearance in October 2011. His job with 
the defense contractor ended in December 2011. In early 2012, Applicant smoked 
marijuana on one occasion with some friends. He did not have an active security 
clearance at the time because he was unemployed.5   
 
 Applicant stated that he does not intend to use marijuana, or any other illegal 
drug, in the future. He indicated that it is dangerous to his health, and it could adversely 
                                                          
1 Items 4-6.  
 
2 Items 3, 5, 6.  
 
3 Items 4-6.  
 
4 Item 5.  
 
5 Items 3, 4, 5.  
 
 
3 
 
affect his job. He understands that he cannot use marijuana and hold a security 
clearance.6    
 
 Applicant submitted another SF 86 in January 2014. He fully disclosed his 
marijuana use on that questionnaire. He also discussed his marijuana use during his 
background interview in March 2014.7  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally providing false information about his marijuana use 
on his 2011 SF 86: 
 
I admit to unknowingly falsifying material facts under Section 23 on an [SF 
86] signed by me on July 19, 2011. This was not intentional on my part as 
I must have answered the question before I had a full understanding of it, 
and if I fully understood the question, I would have answered with an 
affirmative “yes” as I did on the second [SF 86] signed by me on January 
14, 2014.8 
 
 Having considered all the evidence, including Applicant’s education, his answers 
to other questions on the SF 86, the straightforward wording of the question, and 
Applicant’s motive to conceal the information, I find that he intentionally falsified the SF 
86. Having done so, I also find that his response to the SOR was intentionally false 
when he denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
6 Items 3, 4, 6.  
 
7 Items 4, 6. 
 
8 Item 3.  
 
9 Applicant’s false statement in his response to the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It 
may be be used in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during 
the whole-person analysis. 
 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;10  
 
                                                          
10 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana. He did not have an active security 
clearance when he smoked marijuana in 2012, but the use did occur after he was 
granted a security clearance in 2011. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) are all applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant experimented with marijuana on three occasions before he graduated 
from college in 2012. It has been more than three years since he smoked marijuana. I 
find that he has abstained from marijuana use for an appropriate period, and that illegal 
drug use is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about his marijuana use on his 
2011 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.   
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant fully disclosed his marijuana use on his January 2014 SF 86. He also 
discussed his marijuana use during his background interview in March 2014. However, 
having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on his 2011 SF 
86, I have also determined that he provided false information when he denied the 
omission was intentional. It would be inconsistent to find the conduct mitigated.11  
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant the applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I am satisfied that Applicant’s marijuana use is in the past. However, he 
intentionally provided false information about his marijuana use on his 2011 SF 86. 
There are concerns about his judgment, honesty, and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns, but he did not mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
