 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01460 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In an undated answered to the SOR, Applicant elected to have his case decided 
on the written record. On November 26, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
 
2 
 
 
December 8, 2014, and it was received on January 6, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did object to any of Items offered and they are admitted. He did not submit 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 16, 2015.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request, as part of the FORM, that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about the People’s Republic of China (China). 
The request is attached to the record. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that is supported by source 
documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He was born in the United States. He attended high 
school from June 2006 to June 2008 in China and received his diploma. He graduated 
from college in the U.S. in 2012 and has been employed by a federal contractor since 
2013. He is not married and has no children.  
 
Applicant’s parents were born in China. His mother became a naturalized citizen 
of the United States and passed away in 2010. His father is a citizen of China who 
immigrated to the United States. It is unknown what year he immigrated, but he became 
a resident alien in 1992. Applicant’s father frequently travels back and forth between the 
United States and China. He owns his own business in China. When residing in the 
United States, his father stays with a friend. He last visited the friend in 2010. Applicant 
worked for his father in China during the summer of 2010. It was a part-time unpaid job. 
Applicant maintains regular monthly contact with his father.1 
 
Applicant’s grandparents are citizens and residents of China. It is unknown how 
often he is in contact with his grandparents in China. Applicant has two sisters who 
were born and reside in the United States.  
 
China 
 
 China is the world’s most active and persistent perpetrator of economic 
espionage. China is the most aggressive country conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining U.S. information and technologies beneficial to 
China’s military modernization and economic development. There are recent criminal 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
cases that were prosecuted and involve actual or attempted espionage and illegal 
export of sensitive military technology to China. In addition, China has significant human 
rights problems, including the repression of freedom of speech, religion, and 
association.2 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
2 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
 
5 
 
 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”3 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of China. He owns his own business in China and 
travels frequently back and forth between the United States and China. It does not 
appear he owns a permanent residence in the United States, but rather stays with a 
friend when he is here. Applicant maintains regular contact with his father and worked 
for him in China in 2010. Applicant’s grandparents are citizens and residents of China. 
The frequency of his contact with them is unknown, but he visited them in China in 
2010. China has a significant history of conducting espionage against the United States, 
to gain access to both industrial and military information. It has a poor human rights 
record. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant has regular contact with his father and last visited his grandparents in 
2010 when he was in China. It is unknown how often he may contact them. Applicant 
attended high school in China. It is unknown how much time his father resides in China. 
Applicant’s contact with his family is not infrequent or casual. Therefore, I cannot 
conclude that it is unlikelihood that his familial relationships could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence concerns are increased because China aggressively and 
actively engages in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the 
United States. The fact that Applicant’s father owns and obviously is very involved in his 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
 
business in China also creates a potential concern due to any possible government 
involvement in the business. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that the 
Applicant’s familial connections in China would make it unlikely that Applicant would be 
placed in a position of having to choose between his family interests and the interests of 
the United States.  
 
Applicant is a citizen of the United States who attended high school in China and 
worked in his father’s business there. He obviously has significant ties to his father who 
travels to China frequently. There is insufficient evidence to conclude there is no conflict 
of interest, either because Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign 
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or Applicant has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government and its relationship with the United States is 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if a family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. There is 
insufficient evidence to make a determination regarding Applicant’s family’s association 
with the Chinese government or their vulnerability to government coercion. However, 
owning a business in China very likely involves government regulation of the business. 
Although it is possible that Applicant’s father and grandparents in China do not pose a 
security risk, I cannot make that determination without additional evidence. The record 
is void of sufficient information about Applicant or his family that would allow me to find 
that any of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
7 
 
 
     I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 24 years old. He attended high school in China. His father is a citizen 
of China, who owns a business there. His father commutes back and forth between the 
United States and China. Applicant has regular contact with his father. Applicant worked 
for his father at his business in China in 2010. He last visited his grandparents in China 
in 2010. He failed to provide sufficient information to meet his burden of persuasion to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
