 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03856 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but she did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 10, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 22, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
 
2 
 
22, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 23, 2015.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit any documentary evidence. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. She did not submit 
anything. 
 
Motion to Amend the SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the date in SOR ¶ 
2.a from “March 24, 2013,” to “March 24, 2014.” The motion was granted without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. She is being sponsored for a security clearance by a 
defense contractor. She worked for the defense contractor from August 2011 until she 
was laid off in January 2015. She is eligible to be rehired if she receives her security 
clearance. She is a high school graduate. She is married with an adult child, a teenage 
child, and an adult stepchild.1 
 
 Applicant worked for a company from 2000 until she was laid off in 2010. She 
was unemployed from April 2010 until she was hired by the defense contractor in 
August 2011. Her husband developed a medical condition in 2009 or 2010 that has 
prevented him from working. He receives Social Security disability compensation. They 
were unable to pay all their bills, and several debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling about $13,935. Each debt was 
listed on at least one credit report. The debts range in amounts from $64 to $5,103. Five 
of the debts, totaling $1,841, are medical debts.  
 
 Applicant denied owing the medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.k). 
She stated that she has medical insurance, and she made all her copayments.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent debt of $5,103 to a collection company on behalf 
of a financial institution. Applicant admitted owing the debt, but she stated the amount 
owed was $1,800. The 2011 credit report identifies the original debt to the financial 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 41, 46; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-20, 45; GE 1, 2, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
3 
 
institution as charged off with a $4,451 balance. It reports the account as opened in July 
2009, with a date of last action of June 2010. The credit reports from April and August 
2014 show the debt with a $5,103 balance.4 
 
 Applicant stated that her daughter moved into an apartment, and Applicant 
placed the electricity account in her name. Her daughter moved out of the apartment 
without paying the electric bill. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $387 debt to a collection company 
on behalf of the electric company. The debt is listed on the credit reports from April and 
August 2014, with a date of last action of May 2013 and a $387 balance. Applicant 
stated that she has been making small monthly payments. She did not submit any 
corroborating documents.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a delinquent debt of $1,172 to a collection company on behalf 
of a financial institution. Applicant admitted owing the debt, but she stated the amount 
owed was $880. The credit reports from April and August 2014 show the debt with a 
$1,172 balance. The account is reported by Experian as opened in October 2013, with a 
date of last action of March 2014. The account is reported by Equifax as opened in 
October 2013, with a date of last action of November 2009. Applicant stated that her 
husband paid the debt. She did not submit any corroborating documents.6 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $1,511 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
department store (SOR ¶ 1.h). She stated that she went into the store and paid the bill 
before she cancelled the credit card. The 2011 credit report identifies the original debt to 
the department store as charged off with a $1,197 balance. It reports the account as 
opened in May 2008, with a date of last action of August 2009. The credit reports from 
April and August 2014 show the debt with balances of $1,488 and $1,511.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a delinquent debt of $3,857 to a collection company on behalf 
of a bank. Applicant admitted owing the debt, but she stated the amount owed was 
about $2,000. The 2011 credit report identifies the original debt to the bank as 
transferred with a zero balance. It reports the account as opened in September 2008, 
with a date of last action of October 2009. The credit reports from April and August 2014 
show the debt with balances of $3,750 and $3,857. Applicant stated the credit card was 
used to pay the veterinarian bills for her dog that developed cancer. She stated that she 
contacted the creditor, but the creditor would not work with her to lower the payments to 
an amount that she can pay.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
7 Tr. at 38-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 40-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant stated that she paid the $64 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. The debt is 
reported by Experian on the April 2014 combined credit report. It is not listed on the 
August 2014 Equifax credit report.9 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. She testified that her finances 
have improved. She stated that she is committed to paying her debts, but several of the 
creditors have refused to work with her, and they want lump-sum payments. Her current 
unemployment has hindered her efforts to resolve her debts, but she stated that after 
she returns to work she will contact her creditors and attempt to make payment 
arrangements. Applicant was informed of the importance of providing documentary 
evidence to substantiate her payment claims. She was given additional time after the 
hearing to submit evidence, but she submitted nothing.10 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) in 
August 2011. She submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2014. She answered “No” to all the financial questions in both questionnaires. 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying both questionnaires. She stated that her 
husband handled the family’s finances, and she was unaware of the debts. Having 
considered all the evidence, I find that there is insufficient evidence for a determination 
that she intentionally falsified the questionnaires.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-6. 
 
10 Tr. at 41-42, 47.  
 
11 Tr. at 18-20, 32, 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  The evidence does not establish that Applicant intentionally provided false 
information on her questionnaires. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 The medical debts alleged in the SOR do not generate security concerns. SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.k are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from April 2010 until she was hired by a defense 
contractor in August 2011. A medical condition has prevented her husband from 
working since 2009 or 2010. Those events were beyond her control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Applicant was steadily employed until she was laid off in January 2015. Her 
statements that she made payments toward several debts have not been corroborated 
by documentary evidence. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge 
to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” 
See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but she did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-i.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
