Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibit (GE) 1, and hearing exhibit (HE) I.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September  2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXX, Xxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 14-02884
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 18 July 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant raising security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).  Applicant timely answered, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office2
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 23 October 2014,
and I convened a hearing 19 November 2014. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 2
December 2014.
However, Applicant also worked for this employer as a linguist from October 2010 to February 2011. From3
January 2000 to October 2010, and between stints with his current employer, Applicant worked as a store
manager for a local pharmacy chain. He is on a leave of absence from that company, to which he will return
when he is finished with his linguist contract.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied SOR 1.a because her husband now lives in Pakistan, not the
United Kingdom (U.K.), and she denied SOR 1.b because her mother died in March
2014. She admitted the remaining SOR allegations. She is a 28-year-old programmer/
analyst sponsored for clearance by a defense contractor since October 2013.  She has3
not previously held a clearance, but was employed in a public trust position from
February 2008 to August 2011.
Applicant was born in Pakistan in January 1986. She attended school there, and
graduated from college in September 2007 with a degree in information technology. She
immigrated to the U.S. in February 2008, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April
2013. Her most recent Pakistani passport was issued in September 2006 and expired in
September 2011. She last used it to travel to Pakistan from December 2009 to January
2010, when she visited family. She obtained her U.S. passport in August 2013. She
used it to travel to Pakistan in November 2013 for her wedding.
Applicant married a Pakistani national, in Pakistan, in November 2013. He was
living in the U.K., but has returned to school in Pakistan. Applicant has sponsored him
to immigrate to the U.S. 
Applicant is the second youngest of six siblings. Her parents are deceased. At
their deaths, both had been living in the U.S. for several years. Her oldest sister (by
nearly 24 years) is a resident citizen of Pakistan. She is a homemaker. Her husband,
also a resident citizen of Pakistan, runs his father’s business. Applicant’s oldest brother
(by almost 20 years) is a resident citizen of Pakistan, as is his wife. They are both
medical doctors. Applicant has another older sister who is a U.S. citizen living in
Pakistan with her husband, a citizen of Pakistan, while she sponsors him for entry into
the U.S. None of Applicant’s relatives in Pakistan live in areas known to provide safe
havens for terrorist groups. Applicant has weekly contact with her husband, but has little
contact with her older siblings residing in Pakistan.
Applicant’s remaining siblings live with her in the U.S. Her older brother is a
naturalized U.S. citizen. Her younger brother and his wife (who also lives with Applicant)
are citizens of Pakistan. They are both legal permanent residents of the U.S., but have
applied for U.S. citizenship.                        
All Applicant’s financial interests are located in the U.S. She does not intend to
return to Pakistan.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
3
Pakistani law does not permit dual citizenship or nationality except with the U.K.
and Commonwealth nations. Under the Pakistan Citizenship Law of 1951, Applicant
ceased to be a Pakistani citizen when she acquired U.S. citizenship.
Pakistan is an Islamic parliamentary democracy with a poor human rights record,
including extrajudicial killings, torture and rape by security forces, lack of judicial
independence, arbitrary arrest, wide-spread government corruption, and the
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents. Nevertheless, Pakistan has
had diplomatic relations with the U.S. since 1947 and has actively cooperated with the
U.S. in the global war on terrorism. However, terrorist groups operate in Pakistan,
making safety and security an issue. Extremist groups in Pakistan target American and
other Western interests, senior Pakistani officials, and members of minority indigenous
and religious groups. Pakistan is not on the National Counterintelligence Center’s list of
most active nations engaging in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage. It
is not known to be an active collector of U.S. intelligence information, nor is it known to
target its expatriate former citizens to obtain U.S. information.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
¶ 6.5
¶ 7 (a).6
4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline B, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an
applicant’s foreign contacts and interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1)
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to
help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S.
interests, or 3) is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign
influence adjudications can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located—including, but not limited to,
whether the country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.5
Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target expatriates who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.6
While Applicant has only recently become a U.S. citizen, she has no significant
bonds of affection and obligation to family in Pakistan. Her parents, both dead, had long
been legal permanent residents of the U.S. Applicant has no financial interests in
Pakistan. She has sponsored her husband to immigrate to the U.S., which should occur
in due course. A similar resolution awaits her sister’s husband.
None of Applicant’s foreign family members have any apparent connection to the
Pakistani government, and while Pakistan is not the most stable of regimes in the
region, it is not known to pursue U.S. government information or to target its former
citizens for that information. Moreover, none of her family members live in regions of
Pakistan subject to significant threat of terrorist activity. Applicant’s limited contacts with
family members in Pakistan raise little risk of influence adverse to Government
interests. I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a.-f.: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
