 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03362 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on 
September 9, 2014. 
 
In an October 30, 2014, response, Applicant admitted the 12 allegations raised in 
the SOR and requested a determination based on the written record. On February 18, 
2014, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained six 
attachments. Applicant timely responded to the FORM with four documents accepted in 
the record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-4, including a copy of the FORM with hand-written 
comments in the margins. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2015. Based on 
 
 
 
 
2 
my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.    
 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old logistics manager who has worked for the same 
Defense contractor since 2002. After earning a high school diploma, Applicant enlisted 
in the United States Army. He was honorably discharged from the Army for medical 
reasons a few months later. Applicant has been married to his current spouse for over 
25 years. He is the father of three grown children.  
 
Applicant disclosed multiple delinquent debts on his February 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA). Neither his personal subject interview of March 18, 2014, 
nor any subsequently offered materials cite to how or why his debts became delinquent. 
FORM Item 6. At most, Applicant either denies knowledge of how they became 
delinquent, or references to having insufficient funds to make payments. FORM Item 6. 
There is no evidence he has had financial counseling. 
 
The 12 debts at issue in the August 2014 SOR amount to over $17,225 in 
delinquent debts, ranging from $40 to $9,498. In his October 30, 2014, SOR response, 
Applicant noted that the $2,986 delinquent debt was “written off on 2-28-2008. It will 
come off credit report Dec. 14, 2014.” FORM Item 3. He later noted that the court had 
stated that the creditor was “no longer around.” Response to the FORM, attachment.  
 
Applicant provided evidence of sporadic $50 payments in 2014 toward the debt 
at 1.b for $9,498. FORM Item 3. Payments were irregularly made of $146.54 per month 
on the debt noted at 1.c for $1,825. FORM Item 3. The debts noted at 1.d through 1.l 
are for medical balances amounting to about $3,000. Scant information was provided as 
to the origin of these debts. In general terms, payments on most of these debts were 
irregularly made between April 2014 and September 2014. In his undated Response to 
the FORM, Applicant specifically expressed his intent to pay the $138 debt reflected in 
allegation 1.i on March 23, 2014. Although his response was not due until April 3, 2014, 
no evidence of a March 2014 or other payment to this credit was offered. Little more 
information was offered by Applicant regarding his situation and his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
 
 
 
3 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 states that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal 
acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 12 
delinquent debts totaling over $17,225. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
 
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Four conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
Multiple delinquent debts, varying in amounts upward from $40, remain unpaid. 
The circumstances that gave rise to their delinquency are largely unexplained, and 
there is scant information regarding Applicant’s behavior regarding these debts before 
2014. The facts do not indicate whether Applicant has received financial counseling. 
 
Applicant did provide evidence indicating that some payments were made on 
most of the debts in 2014. Those payments, however, were sporadic and erratic. They 
do not establish a record of timely and regular payment. Instead, they demonstrate a 
haphazard approach to addressing his delinquent debts. Applicant’s minimal information 
fails to give rise to any of the available mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant is a 64-year-old logistics manager who has worked for the same 
Defense contractor since 2002. He has a high school diploma and briefly served in the 
military before being honorably discharged for medical reasons. He is married and has 
raised three adult children. Applicant has been continuously employed by the same 
employer for over a decade. He has multiple delinquent debts amounting to over 
$17,000. He alternatively denies knowledge of the status of the debts or cites to a lack 
of funds for their delinquent status, but gives scant information regarding the creation of 
the debts and of their delinquency. No details have been sufficiently divulged to 
determine how or why Applicant had insufficient funds to meet his obligations.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does, 
however, demand that applicants articulate a workable plan to address their delinquent 
debts, and show that their plan has been successfully implemented. Here, Applicant 
showed that payments have been made on many of the debts at issue. Those 
payments, however, were sporadic and erratic; they do not reflect a pattern of 
thoughtfully-planned, methodical, and timely payments indicating a consistent, realistic, 
and on-going commitment to regular debt repayment. In short, the limited evidence 
presented fails to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l  Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
