 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02827 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: D. D., Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 2014, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on February 3, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 18, 2015, setting the hearing 
for March 5, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open for the parties to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant submitted AE F and G, which were admitted into the 
record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and has worked for a government contractor since 
September 2009. He has a high school diploma and has taken some college courses. 
He is married and has six children, five of which still live at home. One of his children 
has special medical needs. He served in the Air Force for seven years and was 
honorably discharged in 2004 at the pay grade of E-4.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was delinquent on eight accounts and filed a 
bankruptcy petition in 2001 that resulted in a discharge of his debts. The debts were 
listed on credit reports from January 2014 and January 2015. Applicant admitted all the 
debts in his answer to the SOR except for SOR ¶ 1.h, which he denied.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began when he was furloughed for a month 
during the federal government shut down in 2013. He had no income at that time to pay 
his monthly bills, the most significant of which was his home mortgage. Applicant’s wife 
immediately contacted their mortgage holder to work out a payment plan during the 
duration of the furlough. The mortgage company advised Applicant that he should stop 
making payments and seek a mortgage modification. Applicant applied for a 
modification, but it was denied. Thereafter, Applicant’s wife worked with the mortgage 
company to establish a repayment plan and has been making payments under the plan, 
which calls for them to make additional principal payments to catch up on the earlier 
missed payments. Also during this time, Applicant incurred several other delinquent 
debts. The status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is a judgment in the amount of $609 that Applicant satisfied in December 
2012. This debt is resolved.4 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 31-33; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 3-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 43-49; Answer. 
 
4 Tr. at 39; Answer.  
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $205. The Government’s offered credit 
report shows that this account is paid. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 This is a telecommunications debt in the amount of $465. Applicant returned 
some equipment and paid the remainder of the debt to settle this account in October 
2014. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 This is a medical debt in the amount of $500. Applicant presented documentation 
showing that he established a payment plan to pay this debt. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f: 
 
 The Government conceded that these debts were paid. Documentation also 
shows that these debts are paid. These debt are resolved.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: 
 
 This is Applicant’s mortgage account, which had a past-due amount of $4,255. 
As noted above, Applicant arranged a repayment plan with the mortgage holder and 
presented documentation that he has made all the payments under the plan. This debt 
is being resolved.9 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.h: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $425. Applicant provided 
documentation showing this debt has been paid. This debt is resolved.10  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 39; GE 4.  
 
6 Tr. at 40-41; Answer.  
 
7 Tr. at 42-43; AE A, B, F.  
 
8 Tr. at 43; GE 4.  
 
9 Tr. at 43-49; AE C-E.  
 
10 Tr. at 51-53; AE G.  
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001 because of debts accumulated 
during a prior marriage.11 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that they currently have disposable income of about 
$2,000 at the end of each month. They only have one credit card and it has a current 
balance. They are current on their taxes. Applicant and his wife received financial 
counselling from Applicant’s mother who is an accountant. They are on track to make all 
their payments including their mortgage.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 55-56.  
 
12 Tr. at 64, 69, 71, 78. 
 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts and a prior bankruptcy. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent, however, the bankruptcy 
is over ten years old. He has paid all the debts and set up workable payments on his 
mortgage account. Since he has made a concerted effort to repair his financial position, 
it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent when he was furloughed from his job in 
2013. This was a condition beyond his control and, once he was able to do so, he acted 
responsibly by contacting his mortgage company and arranging for a repayment plan. 
He was also able to pay the remaining delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant received credit counseling from his accountant mother. He has made a 
good-faith effort to resolve all the debts and work out a repayment plan to pay his 
mortgage listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing the debt 
payments and mortgage repayment plan. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, as well as his furlough from work in 
2013, which affected his financial status. I found Applicant to be honest and candid 
about the circumstances that led to his debts. He and his wife took immediate action to 
resolve their mortgage obligation after being furloughed. They also quickly paid their 
other outstanding debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in a similar future 
situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
