 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-02511 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a native of Colombia, immigrated to the United States with his parents and 
brother in December 2000. He continued to retain a Colombian citizenship identification 
card (ID) after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2011. He surrendered possession 
of his Colombian ID card to mitigate the foreign preference concerns. The foreign influence 
concerns raised by the Colombian residency and citizenship of his maternal grandmother 
and aunt are mitigated because Applicant can be counted on to act in the interest of the 
United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On August 5, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
 
 2 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on September 2, 2014,
1
 and he requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On December 11, 2014, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing and 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for Applicant. On December 17, 2014, I scheduled a hearing 
for January 15, 2015. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and six 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-F) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
two witnesses testified, as reflected in the hearing transcript (Tr.) received on January 26, 
2015. 
  
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In a request for Administrative Notice, dated January 9, 2015, the Government 
requested that the administrative judge take administrative notice of facts regarding the 
Republic of Colombia (Colombia). The Government relied on six publications from the U.S. 
State Department and on a Congressional Research Service Report for Congress.
2
 The 
Administrative Notice request and source documents were provided to me at the hearing. 
The Administrative Notice request and copies of the source documents were sent by email 
to Applicant before the hearing. Applicant did not receive all the source documents by 
email, but he obtained them from the Internet and familiarized himself with them before the 
hearing. 
 
At the hearing, I informed Applicant that due to Appeal Board precedent, I would 
take administrative notice as requested by the Government.
3
 Applicant did not object to 
any of the facts proposed by the Government for administrative notice. He was offered the 
opportunity to propose additional facts for administrative notice after the hearing. Applicant 
declined, and offered no other facts for administrative notice, although he referred to 
Colombia’s regional leadership in countering violent extremism in his closing argument. 
 
                                                 
1 
Applicant’s answer bears a typed date of August 20, 2014. However, it was not signed before a notary until 
September 2, 2014. 
 
2 
The U.S. State Department publications are the U.S. Relations with Colombia, Fact Sheet, dated November 
19, 2013 (I); Foreign Terrorist Organizations, dated January 9, 2015 (II); Country Reports on Terrorism 2013, 
dated April 30, 2014 (III); Travel Warning, Colombia, dated April 14, 2014 (IV); Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices for 2013, undated (VI); and Quick Facts, Colombia, dated November 14, 2014 (VII). The 
Congressional Research Service’s report is titled Latin America Terrorism Issues, dated March 2, 2012. 
  
3 
The DOHA Appeal Board has repeatedly emphasized the importance of making accurate and timely 
assessments of the political landscape in foreign countries when adjudicating Guideline B cases. See e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). 
 
 3 
After reviewing the source documents, I took administrative notice of several facts 
pertinent to Colombia and its international relations, including with the United States, as set 
forth below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant exercises foreign citizenship by 
possessing a Colombian ID card that will not expire before August 2020 (SOR 1.a). Under 
Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to have a grandmother (SOR 2.a) and aunt (SOR 2.b), 
who are residents and citizens of Colombia. 
 
When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted that he possessed the Colombian 
ID card. He expressed a willingness to surrender it to his security officer for the duration of 
his employment with his defense contractor employer. Applicant also admitted that his 
grandmother and aunt are residents and citizens of Colombia. He explained that both of his 
family members have vacationed in the United States, but his contact with them was 
otherwise limited. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After 
considering the pleadings, exhibits, transcript, and the administrative notice documents, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant started working for his current employer in October 2011. (GE 1.) The 
company is a small defense contractor of just under 50 employees. (Tr. 35.) As Art 
Director, Applicant is responsible for completing the user interface and user experience 
design of the company’s software. His employer does not have a facility security clearance, 
so there is no classified information stored at the facility. (Tr. 56.) However, it has a 
contract with a military command that requires Applicant to access security sensitive, but 
not classified information. Applicant seeks a secret-level security clearance largely for 
access at military locations. (Tr. 33-34, 44, 56.) 
 
Applicant was born in Colombia in 1986. (GE 1.) From ages 2 to 5, Applicant lived in 
the United States with his family while his father completed his education at a public 
university here. Applicant then attended primary and middle school in his native Colombia. 
When Applicant was 13, his father accepted a position as a scientist at a U.S. government 
research facility, although in later years, he worked for a succession of contractors at the 
same facility. (Tr. 102.)  Applicant moved to the United States with his family in December 
2000, entering on a Colombian passport issued to him in February 2000 and valid for ten 
years. (GEs 1, 2; AE C; Tr. 62, 67.) 
 
Applicant attended public high school in the United States, graduating in June 2004. 
He then attended a community college, earning his associate’s degree in general studies in 
June 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 67-68.) While in school, he worked part time as a retail sales 
associate in footwear and then as a drum instructor at a music store. In September 2008, 
Applicant matriculated in a private college in the United States (GE 1), where he became a 
member of a social fraternity that required some community service of its members. (AE F; 
Tr. 99.) Apart from a summer job in 2009, he did not work while pursuing his bachelor’s 
 
 4 
degree, which was conferred in May 2011. (GE 1.) He majored in visual communications 
design. (Tr. 68.) 
 
In August 2006, Applicant and his brother obtained their Colombian citizenship ID 
cards at the Colombian Consulate. (GE 2; AE C.) Applicant described the Colombian ID 
card as similar to a social security card in the United States, “like a unique identifier.” It is a 
common practice by Colombians to obtain the ID card after reaching age 18. He was not 
working for a government contractor at the time, and he had no reason to know that the 
Colombian ID card would be of concern. (Tr. 90.) 
 
Applicant took no steps to renew his Colombian passport when it expired in 
February 2010, although he retained the expired Colombian passport in his possession 
after he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2011. (GE 2; AE C.) He has taken no 
steps to acquire a U.S. passport. (GE 1.) 
 
In October 2011, Applicant began working as a graphic designer for his current 
employer. (GE 1; Tr. 69.) At the time, the company had fewer than 20 employees. (Tr. 37.) 
For the last seven years, an engineering consultant and analyst with 25 years of 
employment with the company, has handled the duties of facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 
45.) 
 
Around mid-2012, Applicant was promoted to his current position of Art Director, 
where he supervises two employees. (Tr. 37, 69.) On March 6, 2013, Applicant completed 
and certified to the accuracy of an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP).  He disclosed that he held dual citizenship with his native Colombia and with the 
United States. In response to whether he has ever been issued a passport or identity card 
for travel by a foreign country, he disclosed the ID card from Colombia issued on August 
11, 2006. Applicant provided an expiration date of August 11, 2020, but he also 
discrepantly indicated that the ID card does not expire.  Applicant denied any use of this ID 
card for foreign travel. Due to reported oversight (GE 2), Applicant did not list that he 
previously held a valid Colombian passport. Applicant disclosed that his parents and 
brother hold dual citizenship with Colombia and the United States. In response to any 
foreign contacts, Applicant indicated that he had bi-annual in-person contact with his 
maternal grandmother,
4
 a resident and citizen of Colombia, during his grandmother’s 
vacations in the United States from May 2003 to September 2011. Additionally, he had in-
person contact with two maternal aunts with foreign residency and citizenship. One aunt, a 
Colombian resident-citizen, visited his family in the United States on vacations between 
June 2005 and July 2009. The other aunt, who is a resident and citizen of a European 
country, visited his family in the United States twice between July 2010 and December 
2011. He reported that he had contact with the Colombian Consulate in August 2006 to 
obtain the Colombian ID card. (GE 1.) 
 
                                                 
4 
Applicant checked “other” and added, “Saw my grandmother bi-annually when she came on vacation.” (GE 
1.) Bi-annual usually connotes a twice-yearly occurrence. When Applicant was interviewed by the OPM 
investigator, he indicated that he saw his grandmother once every two years since her first visit to the United 
States in May 2003. (GE 2.) 
 
 5 
On April 12, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator about his dual citizenship and his foreign contacts. 
Applicant explained that he had taken no steps to renounce his foreign citizenship with 
Colombia because he was not asked to do so. Applicant denied receiving any benefit from 
his Colombian citizenship, and he expressed a willingness to renounce his Colombian 
citizenship on request. Applicant expressed some sympathy for Colombia because he was 
born there and has extended family members there, but he did not see it as interfering with 
his loyalty to the United States. Applicant related that he had an expired Colombian 
passport, which he used only to enter the United States in December 2000. Unaware at the 
time that possession of a foreign passport presented any security concern (Tr. 87), 
Applicant expressed intent to renew this foreign passport in the future for ease of travel to 
Colombia. While he had no present plan to travel to Colombia, he would like to visit 
extended family members in Colombia in the future. However, he also indicated that he 
would relinquish his expired Colombian passport on request. About his possession of a 
Colombian ID card, he acquired it when he was a lawful permanent resident of the United 
States solely for citizenship identification. Applicant indicated that he was willing to 
renounce his Colombian citizenship. Yet, he saw no need to do so at present. He had not 
been requested to renounce his foreign citizenship. (GE 2.) 
 
Concerning family members with foreign or dual citizenship, Applicant told the OPM 
investigator that his parents and brother knew that he was working for a defense contractor 
and undergoing a background investigation for a security clearance.  He expanded about 
his foreign contacts abroad. In addition to having in-person contact with his grandmother 
once every two years, he has three or four telephone contacts per year, usually on 
birthdays and holidays. While his aunt from Colombia visited him and his family in the 
United States once or twice since June 2005, he had no other contact with her. Applicant 
disclosed that he had contact with his aunt living in Europe via social media once every two 
months since 2010. Applicant believed none of these foreign relatives knew about his 
employment or his background investigation for a security clearance. Applicant denied any 
other close or continuing contact with other foreign relatives. (GE 2.) 
 
After his interview, Applicant was advised by the Defense Security Service that he 
had to surrender his foreign travel document. Applicant turned over possession of his 
expired Colombian passport to his FSO. In turn, the FSO disfigured it by punching holes, 
and then informed the DOD that it had been voluntarily invalidated.
5
 (AE C; Tr. 47, 51.) 
Neither Applicant nor his FSO was informed that Applicant had to turn over his Colombian 
ID card, so Applicant retained possession of the card. (Tr. 47.) 
 
On August 5, 2014, the DOD CAF issued a SOR to Applicant, alleging, in part, 
foreign preference concerns because of his possession of the Colombian ID card. 
Sometime in late 2014, Applicant relinquished custody of his foreign ID card to his FSO for 
as long as he either is no longer employed by the company or is no longer eligible for a 
                                                 
5 
The FSO testified to his recollection that Applicant surrendered possession of his expired Colombian 
passport “before the FBI interrogation” (i.e., the subject interview). (Tr. 51.) Applicant’s recollection is that he 
turned over his passport after his interview (Tr. 88), which would be consistent with his admission during his 
interview that he still had the passport and no reference to it having been disfigured or invalidated. 
 
 6 
security clearance. (AE B; Tr. 47-48, 54.) Applicant did not request that his Colombian ID 
card be defaced or otherwise disfigured by the FSO. Applicant did not indicate to the FSO 
why he chose to maintain the integrity of the ID card. (Tr. 54.) Applicant explained at his 
hearing that for him, there was no difference whether the card was destroyed or 
surrendered intact. He could reapply for the card, but it was important for him that he had 
no access to the card. Apart from proof of identity, were he to be stopped by the police in 
Colombia, Applicant is unaware of any other privileges it would carry. He could not enter 
Colombia on an ID card in lieu of a Colombian passport and would be required to obtain a 
visa to enter Colombia on a U.S. passport. Applicant acknowledged at his hearing that he 
is aware that as a dual citizen of Colombia and the United States, he is required to present 
a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. Applicant expressed no intent to travel to 
Colombia. (Tr. 75, 95-96.) 
 
As of mid-January 2015, Applicant did not have a valid passport for foreign travel. 
He is willing to renounce his Colombian citizenship, but only if absolutely required for a 
security clearance. (Tr. 91.) Renunciation of Colombian citizenship has not been required 
of his father, who holds a secret-level security clearance for his work with a U.S. 
government contractor. (Tr. 62, 91, 102-103.) Applicant’s mother does not work outside the 
home. His brother is employed by an auto parts retailer. (Tr. 104.)  
 
Applicant still resides at home with his parents and brother. (GE 1; Tr. 100.) He just 
finished repaying his college loans for his bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 100.) Applicant does not 
intend to move back to his native Colombia. (Tr. 101-102.) Applicant’s employer fully 
endorses Applicant for security clearance eligibility. The company’s president/chief 
executive officer has found Applicant to be committed and loyal to the United States, and a 
model employee. (AE A.) The company’s vice president of engineering attributed “a great 
deal” of the company’s growth in recent years to Applicant’s work. (Tr. 37.) 
 
Applicant’s parents own an apartment in Colombia. Applicant has no real estate 
interest or investments in his name in the country. (Tr. 97.) Applicant’s parents come from 
large families. His mother has nine siblings, seven of whom are citizens and residents of 
Colombia. One of Applicant’s aunts lives in Venezuela. To Applicant’s knowledge, none of 
these foreign relatives is affiliated with the Colombian government or military. Applicant 
only disclosed on his e-QIP the two aunts with whom he has had contact. Applicant has 
had no in-person contact with his maternal grandmother since her most recent visit to the 
United States “a couple of years ago.” (Tr. 76.) He has had telephone contact with her on 
infrequent, special occasions over the past 14 years (i.e., one year on her birthday and 
another year on Christmas). (Tr. 77.) The aunt in Colombia, with whom he has had some 
contact over the past 14 years, is a retired architect. (Tr. 79-80.) Applicant’s aunt in Europe 
contacted him lastly in 2014, just to say hello. (Tr. 81-82.) 
 
Applicant’s mother contacts her siblings by telephone, email, and Skype. (Tr. 70-73.) 
She traveled to Colombia to visit her siblings twice:  one when Applicant was in college and 
more recently in 2014. (Tr. 74-75.)  
 
 
 7 
Applicant’s paternal grandmother and all nine of his father’s siblings reside in 
Colombia. Applicant denies close relations with any of his paternal relatives in Colombia, 
although he talked to his grandmother when she called over the holidays in late 2014. (Tr. 
75, 82, 84-85.) He had in-person contact with his paternal grandmother when she visited 
the family in the United States “way before” his current employment. (Tr. 86.) To 
Applicant’s knowledge, his father contacts his family members in Colombia on special 
occasions throughout the year, but Applicant does not know the full extent of his father’s 
contacts with his relatives. A paternal uncle visited Applicant’s family in the United States 
one time, before Applicant started his employment with the government contractor. (Tr. 83-
84.) Applicant’s father traveled to Colombia for about one week in 2014 when he was a 
keynote speaker at a conference. Applicant does not know whether his father visited any of 
his family during that trip. (Tr. 84.) To Applicant’s knowledge, none of his father’s family 
members in Colombia is employed by the Colombian government or military, although 
Applicant has never directly asked his father about any military affiliation. (Tr. 86.) 
 
To Applicant’s belief, his foreign relatives abroad are not aware that he works for a 
government contractor. (Tr. 65.) To his knowledge, none of his foreign relatives has been 
arrested in Colombia or interacted with terrorist organizations or affiliates operating in 
Colombia, such as the leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) or the leftist 
National Liberation Army (ELN). (Tr. 105.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 After considering official U.S. government publications and statements about 
Colombia and its foreign relations, including with the United States, I took administrative 
notice of the following pertinent facts: 
 
 Colombia is a constitutional, multi-party republic, which has seen nearly a half 
century of intense armed conflict with insurgent and paramilitary groups involved in 
widespread illegal drug production and trafficking. The United States has long enjoyed 
favorable relations with Colombia. It provides substantial support to the Colombian 
government’s counter-narcotics efforts, and encourages the Colombian government’s 
efforts to strengthen its democratic institutions in order to promote security, stability, and 
prosperity in the region. Colombia participates in the U.S. State Department’s Antiterrorism 
Assistance Program, which provides instruction and resources to assist Colombia in its 
efforts to build self-sustaining border security capabilities, investigate terrorists and terrorist 
activities, and protect critical infrastructure. Law enforcement cooperation between the 
United States and Colombia has been excellent. 
 
 Although some human rights abuses persist, the Colombian government’s respect 
for human rights continues to improve. Colombia experienced a decrease in terrorist 
activity in 2013, due to success in its military campaign against the Colombian-based 
FARC, which, along with the ELN, remains on the U.S. list of designated terrorist 
organizations.
6
 Illegal armed terrorist groups such as the FARC and the ELN, and 
                                                 
6 
Another Colombian-based terrorist group, the rightist paramilitary United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia 
(AUC) was largely inactive as a formal organization by March 2012. See the CRS’s Latin America: Terrorism 
 
 8 
organized crime groups containing some former paramilitary members, committed the 
majority of human rights violations in Colombia in 2013 involving political killings and 
kidnappings; forced disappearances; subornation and intimidation of judges, prosecutors, 
and witnesses; infringement on rights of privacy and movement; violence against women; 
and killings, harassment, and intimidation of teachers and trade unionists. 
 
 Despite the significant improvement in security in Colombia in recent years, 
especially in tourist and business destinations, the State Department strongly encourages 
U.S. citizens to exercise caution and remain vigilant when in Colombia due to the threat of 
terrorist and criminal activities throughout the country, including from armed criminal gangs 
called BACRIM (Bandas Criminales Emergentes) that are heavily involved in the drug 
trade, extortion, kidnapping, and robbery. While the incidence of kidnapping has 
diminished significantly from its peak in 2000, terrorist groups and other criminal 
organizations continue to kidnap and hold civilians, including foreigners, for ransom. U.S. 
government officials in Colombia regularly travel to the major cities without incident, but 
with restrictions. U.S. government officials and their families are not permitted to travel by 
road between most major cities, use inter-city or intra-city bus transportation, travel by road 
outside urban areas at night, or hail a taxi on the street. The FARC and ELN continue to 
condemn any U.S. influence in Colombia. 
 
 As reported by the U.S. State Department, any person born in Colombia or of 
Colombian parentage may be considered a Colombian citizen. Under Colombian law, all 
Colombian citizens—regardless of dual citizenship—must present a Colombian passport to 
enter and exit Colombia. Colombian citizens traveling with non-Colombian passports 
frequently have been prevented from departing the country until they obtain a Colombian 
passport. Persons who are both U.S. and Colombian citizens must present their Colombian 
passport on departing Colombia and their U.S. passport on arrival in the United States. 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
                                                                                                                                                             
Issues, Mar. 2, 2012, at 2. The AUC had been designated by the United States as a foreign terrorist 
organization from September 10, 2001, until July 15, 2014, when it was delisted. See the U.S. State 
Department’s list, Foreign Terrorist Organizations. 
 
 9 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C—Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign preference is articulated in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. 
 
At age 13, Applicant moved to the United States from his native Colombia with his 
parents and brother for his father’s employment with the U.S. government. Applicant 
attended middle school, high school, and college in the United States. As a lawful 
permanent resident of the United States, he acquired a Colombian ID card in August 2006, 
which he attests was customary for Colombian citizens. He held a valid Colombian 
passport until February 2010. The Directive provides for mitigation of active exercise of 
foreign citizenship when “the exercise of the right, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
 
 10 
citizenship occurred before the individual because a U.S. citizen or when the individual was 
a minor.” See AG ¶ 11(c).  
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2011, during his last 
semester in college, but he also chose to retain his Colombian citizenship. Retention of 
foreign citizenship acquired from birth out of respect for one’s ethnic heritage, for example, 
is not disqualifying in the absence of an exercise of a right, privilege, or obligation of that 
citizenship. See AG ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country.”  As a dual citizen, Applicant has taken no affirmative act to exercise a 
privilege, right or obligation of his foreign citizenship, such as renewing his foreign 
passport, which would have triggered AG ¶ 10(a): 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such 
benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
Even so, Applicant continued to hold onto his Colombian ID card, which is a significant 
indicia of his foreign citizenship. His rationale for having the card, to prove his identity as a 
Colombian should he travel to Colombia, raises some concerns of foreign preference, 
especially given his expressed intent in April 2013 to renew his expired Colombian 
passport so that he could travel to Colombia. He had no plans at that time to travel to 
Colombia, but it is also clear that he wanted to visit family members in Colombia in the 
future. 
 
 The U.S. government recognizes that dual nationality exists but does not encourage 
it as a matter of policy because of the problems that it may cause. As a dual citizen of 
Colombia and the United States, Applicant may have obligations of his Colombian 
citizenship that conflict with U.S. law. As a native Columbian citizen, Applicant is required 
under Colombian law to enter Colombia with a Colombian passport. His dual nationality 
could limit U.S. government efforts to assist him abroad, especially in Colombia. Concerns 
 
 11 
of dual citizenship, such as competing obligations, could be mitigated under AG ¶ 11(b), 
“the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” During his subject 
interview in April 2013, Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his Colombian 
citizenship, but he added that he saw no need to do so at that time. He had not been 
requested to relinquish his foreign citizenship. As of his hearing in mid-January 2015, 
Applicant had taken no steps in that regard. Although he again expressed a willingness to 
renounce his Colombian citizenship, he indicated that he would do so only if absolutely 
necessary. He added that it had not been required of his father, who apparently was 
granted a secret-level security clearance as a dual citizen. Applicant’s obvious preference 
is to retain his dual citizenship. Yet, his surrender of his Colombian passport and ID card is 
consistent with a willingness to renounce his foreign citizenship. AG ¶ 11(b) applies. 
 
In addition, mitigating condition AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, 
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” is established. 
Applicant revealed during his subject interview in April 2013 that he still possessed his 
Colombian passport, which had expired in February 2010. Shortly after that interview, he 
was informed by the DOD that he had to surrender the passport.  Applicant acted 
expeditiously to turn over custody of his expired passport to his FSO, who disfigured it. 
Concerns of future unverifiable travel as a Colombian citizen were largely mitigated at that 
point. Any concern that Applicant could renew his Colombian passport at the Consulate or 
obtain any other foreign benefit or privilege by using his Colombian ID card has been 
addressed by Applicant’s surrender of his foreign ID card to the custody of his FSO, who 
will maintain control of the ID card until such time as Applicant leaves his employment or is 
no longer eligible for a security clearance. Neither Applicant nor his FSO realized initially 
the security risk presented by a foreign ID card. When it became obviously an issue, 
Applicant demonstrated his willingness to comply with DOD requirements. Aware that he 
cannot enter Colombia without a Colombian passport, he made his choice in preference to 
the United States. The foreign preference concerns are mitigated. 
 
Guideline B—Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns about foreign influence are articulated in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is 
not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the 
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The security concerns underlying AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
 
 12 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” are established. Applicant has ongoing, 
albeit infrequent, contact with his maternal grandmother and one of his mother’s sisters, 
who are residents and citizens of Colombia. While Colombia and the United States have 
good relations, Colombian resident-citizens are at heightened risk because of the violent 
activities and human rights abuses committed by designated terrorist organizations, such 
as the FARC, and armed criminal insurgents and gangs (BACRIM) operating in the 
country. While Applicant also has contact with a maternal aunt, who resides in Europe, the 
Government did not allege, and there is no evidence to suggest, that Applicant’s contacts 
or connections to this aunt present a heightened risk or a potential conflict of interest. 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or 
country by providing that information,” focuses not on contacts, but rather on relationships 
with foreign persons, organizations, governments, or countries that pose a risk of a conflict 
of interest. While there is a significant degree of overlap between AG ¶ 7(a) and ¶ 7(b), the 
concern under AG ¶ 7(b) is that Applicant has such close bonds to Colombian citizens that 
he could be placed in the position of having to choose between their interests and his 
obligation to protect classified information. Applicant’s contact with his grandmother has 
been more frequent than with his aunt. She visited Applicant and his family every two years 
or so starting in May 2003, although there is no evidence of any in-person contact with her 
in the last couple of years. Applicant has had telephone contact with his grandmother by 
telephone on special occasions, such as birthdays or holidays. Applicant’s contact with his 
aunt in Colombia has been limited to her two visits to the United States between June 2005 
and July 2009. Given the limited contact, it is difficult to establish particularly strong 
personal bonds. Yet, AG ¶ 7(b) cannot be discounted completely, given Applicant 
expressed a desire in 2013 to visit his family members in Colombia someday. 
 
 Moreover, AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” applies in this case. Applicant resides with his parents 
and brother. His mother contacts her relatives in Colombia by telephone, email, and Skype. 
She traveled to Colombia to visit her family members at least twice, including in 2014. 
 
 The country in which Applicant’s grandmother and aunt are located makes it difficult 
to mitigate the foreign influence concerns under AG ¶ 8(a):  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely that the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. 
 
On the one hand, Colombia is largely a victim of terrorism. The Colombian government has 
had success in recent years in countering insurgent activity and combating narcotics 
trafficking. Security has improved significantly in tourist and business travel destinations. 
 
 13 
Yet, due to the ongoing risk of violence, kidnapping, and terrorist acts by the FARC and 
illegally armed criminal organizations, the United States limits travel of U.S. government 
employees and their families in Colombia and warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to 
Colombia.  
 
 As a U.S. immigrant, Applicant may reasonably be expected to have some contact 
with, and some feelings of affection or obligation, for his grandmother and aunt in 
Colombia. While the extent of his contacts with them may reasonably be characterized as 
infrequent, AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could crease a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation,” the risk of foreign influence through his mother and her ties to her family in 
Colombia is not adequately addressed by AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
 Having considered Applicant’s preference to retain his Colombian citizenship, I am 
nonetheless persuaded that Applicant can be counted on to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. The decision to leave Colombia was made for him by his 
parents, who moved to the United States for his father’s career. Over the next 14 years, he 
was raised and educated in the United States. In college, he joined a social fraternity that 
required some level of community service. He voluntarily acquired his U.S. citizenship in 
February 2011, and after earning his bachelor’s degree, he remained in the United States 
to pursue his career in graphic design. While he has not yet acquired a U.S. passport, the 
evidence shows that he did not use his Colombian passport for any foreign travel after 
coming to the United States as a minor in December 2000. He took no steps to renew his 
foreign passport when it expired, even though he was not yet working for a defense 
contractor. Applicant does not own any real estate in the United States or in Colombia, but 
his contributions to his defense contractor employer show his commitment to his life here. 
Applicant’s closest personal bonds are to his parents and brother, who, like him, are dual 
citizens of the United States and Colombia. Their U.S. citizenship and residency lessen the 
risk of undue foreign influence that may exist because of their Colombian citizenship. 
Applicant’s father has been vetted and determined eligible to hold a DOD security 
clearance, despite his own familial and financial ties to Colombia. AG ¶ 8(b) applies to 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
7
 
                                                 
7 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
 
 14 
For the last 14 years, Applicant has maintained a lifestyle consistent with a 
preference for the United States, even though he became naturalized in the United States 
only four years ago. In comparison, his ties to Colombia are largely sentimental. His 
managers, who have had an opportunity to observe his work performance and his integrity, 
support his eligibility for a security clearance. They have seen nothing in Applicant’s 
character or work that causes them to doubt Applicant’s loyalty or commitment to the 
United States. After considering the evidence in light of the adjudicative guidelines, I 
conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                             
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
