 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02472 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s Spouse, Personal Representative1 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns raised by the $69,000 in delinquent federal tax debt alleged in the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Accordingly, her request for access to sensitive 
information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations guideline.2 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive information and recommended that the 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or 
deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s Spouse, who is an attorney, elected to appear as a personal representative, not legal 
counsel in this matter. Department Counsel did not object to him doing so. 
 
2 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.3 At the hearing, 
convened on February 10, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE D through G, which were also admitted without objection.4 I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 46, began working for a federal contractor in February 2012. 
Applicant’s employer promoted her in 2013 into a position that requires Applicant to 
obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust. On her March 2013 security 
clearance application, Applicant disclosed derogatory financial information related to 
outstanding federal income taxes for the 2007 tax year and a 2012 home foreclosure. 
The ensuing background investigation also revealed that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in 2005 and that the IRS filed tax liens against Applicant and her 
husband for the 2009, 2012, and 2013 tax years.5  
 
The state of Applicant’s household finances is influenced by the ebb and flow of 
her husband’s law practice. In 2005, Applicant was a full-time student and her 
husband’s practice was not generating enough income to support their family of five. As 
a result, they fell behind on their mortgage and filed for bankruptcy protection to save 
their home from foreclosure.6 After winning a large settlement, Applicant’s husband 
returned the mortgage to good standing and paid other past-due bills. The bankruptcy 
was dismissed. The couple was financially stable until 2007.7  
 
 At hearing, Applicant’s husband testified that they manage their household 
finances together. Although Applicant’s husband maintains his business finances 
separately, they jointly file their federal income tax return. In 2007, Applicant’s husband 
began having difficulty making his quarterly tax payments and eventually stopped 
making them altogether. Toward the end of 2007, Applicant’s husband won a large 
settlement. He used the money to pay bills, but he did not pay his federal income taxes. 
As a result, the IRS filed a tax lien against the couple for $39,000. Applicant and her 
husband repeated this cycle in the years that followed. As Applicant’s husband received 
cash settlements, they did not pay federal income taxes on the money received. 
Instead, they would use the money to pay down past-due tax liabilities from prior years 
and to pay other delinquent financial obligations. As a result, they accumulated tax debt, 
which resulted in the IRS filing tax liens against the Applicant and her husband for the 
                                                          
3 The Government’s discovery letter, dated November 28, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
4 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s Exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
5 Tr. 15-17; GE 1-5. 
 
6 SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
7 Tr. 18-20; GE 5. 
 
3 
 
2009 ($51,000), 2012 ($14,000), and 2013 ($4,000) tax years.8 The couple claims to 
have participated in a payment plan between 2008 and 2014, however, they did not 
provide any records to corroborate this statement.9  
 
 In 2008, Applicant’s husband’s practice experienced a good year. Flush with 
cash, the couple took advantage of the depressed housing market and purchased a 
new home for $340,000. However, the decrease in home values in their state prevented 
the sale of their old home. They rented the property for almost four years and stopped 
paying the mortgage toward the end of 2012. They were able to negotiate a short sale 
of the property to prevent its foreclosure. However, an IRS lien on the property 
prevented its sale. The mortgage company foreclosed on the property in 2013.10 The 
IRS captured $10,000 of the proceeds from the foreclosure sale and applied it to the 
couple’s outstanding federal tax balance.11  
 
At hearing, neither Applicant nor her husband could provide concrete details 
about their finances. Applicant earns just over $71,000 annually. Her husband earns at 
least $27,600, which is guaranteed from a municipal contact. However, neither could 
answer questions about their total household income for 2014. Although they do not 
have a written budget, Applicant’s husband testified that they are able to pay their 
recurring bills. Applicant’s husband did admit that he is two months, $700, behind on the 
rent for his office space. Regarding their taxes, Applicant’s husband testified that 
although they filed their annual federal tax returns, they did so after requesting filing 
extensions because they often had difficulty compiling the financial information their 
accountant needed to complete the returns. Applicant and her husband agree that his 
failure to pay taxes on his income is the cause of their tax problems. Applicant testified 
that she has federal income tax deducted from her pay, claiming 11 tax withholding 
allowances. Applicant claims that she came up with the number of withholding 
allowances using the appropriate IRS form.12 Although she believes her federal tax 
obligation is satisfied through her payroll deductions, she does not know for sure if this 
is the case.13 
 
Applicant understands that as the number of withholding allowances increases, 
the amount of federal income tax withheld from her pay decreases. Applicant also 
admitted that even though she and her husband have their federal tax returns prepared 
by tax professional, they have never sought advice about her withholding allowances or 
considered decreasing her withholding allowances. Currently, Applicant’s husband is in 
the process of negotiating a new payment plan with the IRS. He also expects that any 
                                                          
8 SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d. 
 
9 Tr. 21-22,31, 40-44, 55; GE 1-4. 
 
10 SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
11 Tr. 22-25, 45-49; AE B. 
 
12 (Tr. 54, 62); See IRS Instruction for FORM 8379 (2012). 
  
13 Tr. 25, 32, 34, 56, 62. 
 
4 
 
cash settlements he wins during the year will be used to reduce their outstanding tax 
debt.14 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”15 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”16 Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.17 An administrative judge’s 
objective is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision that embraces all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious trustworthiness concern because failure 
to “satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive 
                                                          
14 Tr. 27, 57-61. 
 
15 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
16 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
17 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
5 
 
information.”18 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. 
  
The record establishes that Applicant has a history of financial problems, dating 
back to at least 2005. Since then, she and her husband have demonstrated a history of 
not paying their financial obligations, in particular their federal income taxes.19 They 
have also demonstrated an inability and unwillingness to satisfy their outstanding tax 
debts.20 Applicant and her husband’s ongoing inability to pay their taxes also indicates 
that they are living beyond their means.21  
 
Applicant argues that the events causing her financial problems were caused by 
events beyond her control, namely her husband’s failure to pay taxes on the income he 
earns from his law practice. While Applicant’s husband’s failure to properly pay income 
taxes is responsible for the majority of the couple’s tax debt, the fault does not fall on 
him alone. Applicant’s assertion that with 11 withholding allowances that the deductions 
from her pay is sufficient to cover her federal tax liability is unsubstantiated. Given their 
minimum combined income of $99,000, her assertion is unlikely to be correct. Applicant 
and her husband made a joint decision to mismanage their federal income tax 
obligations. They are not employing lawful tax avoidance measures, but are knowingly 
and willingly engaging in practices designed to evade and manipulate their federal tax 
obligations. He does not pay income taxes on his income as it is earned and Applicant 
likely claims more withholding allowances than she is entitled to receive. Applicant is not 
an injured22 or innocent spouse.23 Applicant and her husband made financial decisions 
intentionally prioritizing their self-interests over their obligations to the government.  
 
Applicant did not present any evidence to mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns. Given the tax strategy Applicant and her husband have pursued, their tax 
debt was not created by events beyond their control. Furthermore, there is nothing in 
the record to show that she and her husband have made a good-faith effort to resolve 
their federal tax liabilities. Nor does the couple plan to deviate from their current tax 
strategy. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and cannot be considered under 
                                                          
18  AG ¶ 18. 
 
19 AG ¶ 19(c).  
 
20AG ¶ 19(a).  
 
21 AG ¶ 19 (e). 
 
22 An injured spouse allocation is available to a married tax payer who files a joint return with their 
spouse, but believes all or a part of the injured spouses tax overpayment (income tax refund) is captured 
by the IRS and is applied to a past-due obligation of the spouse. See IRS Instruction for FORM 8379.  
 
23 An innocent spouse is an individual who filed a joint tax return with their spouse and believes that only 
the other spouse should be held liable for a particular tax liability. Typically, this designation requires 
some act of bad faith by the other spouse, such as the other spouse omitting income, claiming false 
deductions or credits, and that the innocent spouse did not have reason to know of the bad acts. See IRS 
Instruction for FORMs 8857 and 8379. 
 
6 
 
control. Applicant’s ongoing inability to meet her most basic obligation to the 
government casts doubts on her suitability to enter into a fiduciary relationship with the 
government. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public 
trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is actively engaged in financial practices that ensure that 
she will continue to incur debt that she cannot pay. Currently, her unpaid tax debt is 
almost as much as her annual salary. As a result, their finances are and will remain an 
area of potential vulnerability that is unacceptable for an individual occupying a position 
of trust.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Her 
eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is denied.  
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
