 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03288 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 13, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
16, 2015, scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted documents that were marked AE C and D and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 23, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2002. He has worked off and on for the company, either as a 
direct employee or as a subcontractor, since 1986. He seeks to retain his security 
clearance, which he has held for many years. He has a master’s degree. He has been 
married for more than 35 years. He does not have children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a state tax lien of $10,466 entered against Applicant in 2009. 
Applicant admits the state filed the tax lien against him, but he denies owing the 
underlying taxes. 
 
 Applicant lived and worked from 1989 through February 1996 in a state that does 
not have state income taxes (State A). He and his wife moved to State B in February 
1996 for a job. State B does have state income taxes. From June 1997 through May 
1998, they lived in a third state (State C). They moved back to State B in June 1998. 
Applicant and his wife built a house in State B in 1999. Applicant and his wife were 
working in State B, and he thought they would be living there for another three or four 
years.2 
 
 In 1999, Applicant accepted a 36-month assignment in a foreign country, working 
as a subcontractor for his current employer. He actually spent about 33 months in the 
foreign country. He spent two weeks in State A for training before moving to the foreign 
country in March 1999. His wife moved to the foreign country at a later date. Applicant’s 
sister-in-law lived in their house in State B while Applicant and his wife were in the 
foreign country.3  
 
 Applicant was hired as a direct employee of his company in January 2002. He 
moved from the foreign country back to State B where he lived and worked from 
January 2002 until the company transferred him to State A about nine months later in 
2002. He has lived in State A ever since.4 
 
 Applicant’s employer withheld State B income tax from Applicant’s paycheck in 
1999 and 2000. It appears that $3,589 was withheld for State B income taxes during 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 42; GE 1; AE C. 
 
2 Tr. at 13-14, 18, 27; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. at 13-15; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 15-16, 19-20; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
2000. It is unclear whether state income taxes were withheld for 2001. Applicant’s wife 
handled their income tax returns.5 
 
 Applicant went to the State B Department of Revenue on March 28, 2002, to 
dispute his state taxes for 2000. The State B representative told Applicant that he would 
research the matter. The representative called Applicant on April 2, 2002, and told him 
that after researching the issue the state taxes would stand.6 
 
 On April 8, 2002, Applicant sent a letter to the Commissioner of the State B 
Department of Revenue. He requested “a conference and a hearing to vacate an 
erroneous tax return and obtain a refund of the $3,589.00.” Applicant stated that in 
“2000, [he and his wife] were legal residents and domiciliaries of [foreign country], and 
therefore, not subject to taxation in [State B].”7 
 
 In May 2002, Applicant filed an amended return for tax year 2000, seeking a 
refund of $3,589. In October 2002,8 Applicant sent a letter to the State B tax examiner 
explaining his circumstances and requesting his refund for tax year 2000. He claimed 
that in 2000 he and his wife were “legal residents and domiciliaries of [foreign country] 
with a tax home in [foreign country].”9 
 
 In November 2002, the State B Department of Revenue replied to Applicant’s 
letter and expanded the examination of Applicant’s state taxes to tax years 1998 
through 2002. Applicant was requested to complete a Residency Questionnaire and 
submit any other documentation he believed would “support [his] position of a change of 
domicile from [State B].” The letter further noted:  
 
Domicile is not something easily abandoned once established. A person 
may have more than one residence but only one domicile. Basically, the 
established, fixed, permanent or ordinary dwelling place of a person as 
distinguished from his temporary and transient place of residence. It is his 
legal residence, as distinguished from his temporary place of abode, as 
distinguished from a place to which business or pleasure may temporarily 
call him. The term domicile is defined in [State B] as generally held to 
equal the concurrence of (1) physical presence in a place with (2) an 
intent to make that place your permanent home. The term sojourn applies 
to a temporary residence. As a sojourner, it is possible for a person to 
travel away from his domicile or resident state without breaking the 
relationship of domiciliary or residence. 
 
                                                          
5 AE B. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
8 The letter is incorrectly dated 2001. 
 
9 AE B. 
 
4 
 
As you may have noticed, I have broadened the examination period to 
cover the period prior to the move to [foreign country]. It is important to 
understand that the year a change occurs can be the most important and 
relevant data in evaluating a change of domicile. It is also important to 
note that once you are deemed to be a resident of our state then you 
remain in such status until you demonstrate you have become a legal 
resident or domiciliary elsewhere.10 
 
 Applicant and his wife responded to the State B Department of Revenue letter in 
December 2002. He and his wife sent a formal dispute to the State B Department of 
Revenue in December 2005. That letter noted that State B assessed them as owing 
$4,019 in state taxes. The state’s response to that dispute is not in the record, but it 
must have ruled against them because it filed the $10,466 state tax lien against him in 
2009. There is no evidence that Applicant ever received a hearing or utilized the 
additional appellate processes available in State B.11 
 
 Applicant testified that he understands State B’s position, but he disagrees with 
it. With the exception of the state tax lien, Applicant’s finances are sound. His credit 
score is reported as “Good.”12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
10 AE B. 
 
11 Tr. a 16-17; AE B. 
 
12 Tr. at 16-24, 27-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-D. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant lived, worked, and bought a home in State B before he went to a 
foreign country for a 36-month assignment for which he stayed about 33 months. His 
sister-in-law lived in his home while he and his wife were in the foreign country. They 
returned from the foreign country to State B where they lived and worked until they 
moved to State A. State B filed a $10,466 tax lien against Applicant in 2009. Applicant 
 
6 
 
does not believe he owes State B income taxes. He sent several letters to the state 
attempting to dispute the matter. Applicant’s efforts did not dissuade State B, and he 
has not convinced me that he does not owe taxes to State B. Applicant’s arguments are 
insufficient to overcome the state’s tax determination. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 In making this analysis, I have considered cases before the State B Tax 
Tribunal. A case decided on December 10, 2014, Docket No. 1345974, (specific citation 
not provided so as not to identify State B) had somewhat similar facts to Applicant’s, 
and upheld the tax determination. The individual in that case left State B for a two-year 
assignment in a foreign country at a U.S. Embassy. The assignment was later extended 
to five years. The State B Tax Tribunal wrote in its decision: 
 
As noted at the outset of this decision, there are significant policy 
arguments that U.S. citizens, including those residing in [State B], ought 
not to be taxed on income earned outside of the United States while 
residing abroad. But that is not the law. To the contrary, the law is well 
settled that to escape liability for [State B] income tax, a [State B] 
domiciliary who is working abroad must establish a new domicile. 
Otherwise, the taxpayer will continue to be a legal resident for [State B] 
tax purposes taxable on the taxpayer’s world-wide income. Merely 
residing in a foreign country, even for a significant period of time, is not 
sufficient. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not believe he owes State B. However, the evidence and the law 
contradict his belief. There are no applicable mitigating conditions.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
  
 I considered Applicant’s long and stable work history. His unpaid state taxes 
appear to be the only blemish on his record. However, it is a telling blemish. His 
decision to disregard the findings of a government entity leads me to question his 
judgment, trustworthiness, and ability to comply with laws and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
