 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05172 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and drug involvement security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 5, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which 
were admitted without objection.1 The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. She submitted documents that were marked AE L through N and 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since January 2014. She is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. She attended a technical school for computer applications and networks. 
She also has a few college credits. She has never married, and she has no children.2 
 
 Applicant was an occasional marijuana user from high school through September 
2013. She also bought small amounts of marijuana. She used cocaine on a few 
occasions in 2011. When she accepted her current job in January 2014, she moved 
more than 2,000 miles. She is aware that she could lose her job and her security 
clearance if she uses illegal drugs again. She credibly testified that she will not do so.3  
 
 Applicant worked for a company from 2004 through January 2010. The company 
was purchased by another company, and Applicant was one of many employees who 
were laid off. She was unemployed from January 2010 through September 2010. She 
took out a loan from her 401(k) retirement account in 2008. When she was unemployed, 
she was unable to maintain the loan payments, and the loan converted to an early 
withdrawal, which carries income tax consequences. She was unable to pay all the 
taxes for tax years 2010 and 2011. She owed $4,756 plus penalties and interest for 
2010 (SOR ¶ 1.j - $8,481) and $628 plus penalties and interest for 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.k - 
$702).4 
 
 In about 2012, Applicant entered into a $164 per month payment agreement with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to address her 2010 and 2011 taxes. She has made 
her monthly payments, and she has reduced the balance owed for both years to a total 
of $7,746.5 
 
 Applicant found another job in September 2010. She worked for that employer 
until she accepted her current position in January 2014. In 2011, Applicant took a friend 
into her house to live. She did not know that he was a heroin addict. Once she realized 
he was an addict, she attempted to get him help. She used credit cards to pay for his 
treatment, which was unsuccessful. He took advantage of her generosity and stole from 
                                                          
1 AE A through K were originals. They were returned to Applicant during the hearing with the requirement 
that she return copies of the documents after the hearing, which she did. 
 
2 Tr. at 42, 45-46; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 41-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 17-21, 36-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 17-20, 36-38; AE C. 
 
3 
 
her. Between paying to try and get him clean and what he stole from her, she was 
unable to pay all her bills and her debts became delinquent.6 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts with balances totaling about $47,200 and 
that Applicant stopped paying her mortgage loan in January 2014. Applicant admitted all 
the allegations, but she indicated that she is in the process of paying her debts. 
 
 Applicant fell behind on the mortgage loan and the home equity line of credit on 
her condominium in January 2014 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.i). The March 2014 credit report 
lists the mortgage loan as $2,053 past due with a $100,620 balance. The home equity 
line of credit was reported as $139 past due with a $41,605 balance. Applicant short 
sold the condominium in September 2014 for about $102,000. The owner of the 
mortgage loan issued an IRS Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) in September 2014, 
which cancelled the $12,437 deficiency. The owner of the home equity line of credit also 
issued an IRS Form 1099-C in September 2014, which cancelled $36,992. Applicant is 
aware of the potential tax consequences of these actions.7 
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt-management company in December 2013 to 
assist in resolving her debts. She enrolled eight accounts, including seven debts from 
the SOR, in the company’s debt-resolution plan: SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($4,544), 1.c ($3,046), 1.d 
($3,228), 1.e ($753), 1.f ($12,958), and 1.g ($3,434). She pays the company $549 every 
month. The company keeps $20 as a maintenance fee and then disburses the 
remainder to her creditors. Applicant established that she paid the company $849 in 
April and May 2014, $682 in June 2014, and $549 every month from July 2014 through 
February 2015. The $753 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e has been paid.8 
 
 Applicant has been paying the $8,017 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h outside her 
debt-resolution plan. She has a $250 per month payment plan with the law firm 
collecting the debt. The March 2015 credit report shows the balance as reduced to 
$5,645.9 
 
 Applicant disclosed her drug use, delinquent debts, and unpaid taxes on her 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which she submitted in March 
2014. She discussed both matters during her background interview in March 2014. She 
received financial counseling from the debt-management company. She stated that with 
her current employment, her finances are back on track. She credibly testified that she 
will continue with her payment plans until all her delinquent debts are paid.10 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 20-21, 39-41; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 25-26, 36; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A, B, K. See http://www.irs.gov/Individuals/ 
The-Mortgage-Forgiveness-Debt-Relief-Act-and-Debt-Cancellation-.  
 
8 Tr. at 21, 29-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D, E, J, O. 
 
9 Tr. at 21-23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE I, L, M. 
 
10 Tr. at 45-46; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her financial obligations. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by her unemployment in 2010 and 
her helping a friend who turned out to be a heroin addict. The unemployment was 
beyond her control, but she was not obligated to help the friend. She has been paying 
 
6 
 
the IRS since about 2012, and she has been paying her debts through the debt-
management company since April 2014. She has a payment plan for another debt, and 
her home loans have been resolved through a short sale. She credibly testified that she 
will continue with her payment plans until the debts are paid. 
 
 I find that Applicant has established a plan to resolve her financial problems, and 
she has taken significant action to implement that plan. She acted responsibly and 
made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. There are clear indications that her financial 
problems are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because Applicant is still in the 
process of paying her debts.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;11 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana and cocaine. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
7 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant was an occasional marijuana user from high school through 
September 2013. She experimented with cocaine on a few occasions in 2011. She has 
not used any illegal drugs since September 2013. In January 2014, she got a new start 
with a good job more than 2,000 miles from where she used to live. She is aware that 
she could lose her job and her security clearance if she uses illegal drugs again. She 
clearly, unequivocally, and credibly committed to remaining drug-free. I find that she has 
abstained from illegal drug use for an appropriate period, and that illegal drug use is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant was a credible witness. I am satisfied that her illegal drug use is in the 
past, and that she is committed to paying all her debts. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations and drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
