 
1 
 
 
																																																														
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01802 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
2 
 
 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. On August 15, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on January 
23, 2015. On February 10, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for February 16, 2015. The hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, while Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and offered Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through O. The record of the proceeding was left open until March 12, 
2015, to provide Applicant an opportunity to present additional matters. Applicant timely 
submitted documents that were marked as AE P through AH. All proffered exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was 
received on March 10, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2011. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
November 1988 to April 2011, attained the grade of senior chief petty officer (E-8), and 
retired honorably. In about 2011, he attended college for a year without earning a 
degree. He has been married twice. His first marriage began in 1990 and ended in 
divorce in 2011. He married his current wife in 2011. He has three children, ages 17, 19, 
and 23, from his first marriage and one child, age 4, from his second marriage. He has 
held a security clearance since about 1991.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had three delinquent debts totaling $209,750. In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each allegation. Over 95% of the alleged debt 
involves the mortgage foreclosure alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. A credit report dated 
September 27, 2013, contains substantial evidence of each alleged debt.2 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his marital separation and divorce. 
From February to August 2009, he deployed to Afghanistan. While he was deployed, his 
wife’s boyfriend moved into their house. Shortly after his return, she moved out of the 
house, which resulted in $2,200 reduction in the monthly household income. Upon his 
return, he also learned that she took out a $90,000 second mortgage on the house 
solely in her name. Furthermore, she did not pay a number of other bills while he was 
deployed. Those bills became delinquent, but he later paid them.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 28-29, 34-35, 53-55; GE 1, 2; AE H. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3; AE A.  “It is well-settled that adverse information from a 
credit report can normally meet the substantial basis standard and the government’s obligation under ¶ 
E3.1.14 [of the Directive] for pertinent allegations.” See ISCR 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010).  
3 Tr. 30-32, 36-37, 55-56, 67-68; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2; AE M, P. A Temporary 
Needs Order reflected that Applicant had an extramarital affair with a woman from Bosnia in 2008. His 
extramarital affair may have been a factor in his ex-wife’s extramarital relationship. See AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
In January 2010, Applicant initiated divorce proceedings. His wife was initially 
granted custody of the children, and he was required to pay $2,100 monthly in 
temporary alimony and child support. The divorce proceedings lasted almost two years. 
During that period, he struggled financially and fell behind on his mortgage payments. In 
October 2011, the divorce was granted. At that time, his oldest child was emancipated. 
He was granted custody of the two younger children. In the divorce, he was awarded 
the house and agreed to assume responsibility for the first and second mortgages. He 
paid approximately $32,000 in attorney’s fees during the divorce proceeding. He no 
longer is required to pay child support. His ex-wife is entitled to $730 of his monthly 
military retirement pay.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – mortgage foreclosure in the approximate amount of $207,831  
 
a. In 2010, Applicant’s house went into a foreclosure status. Since then, he 
entered into two temporary repayment plans in an attempt to rehabilitate the primary 
mortgage loan. Under those plans, he made mortgage payments for about four months 
before the creditor demanded a lump-sum payment of the entire past-due amount, 
which he could not afford. His last mortgage payment was made in December 2011, but 
he continues to reside in the home. After his last mortgage payment, the creditor 
refused to accept any further payments. He continued to contact the creditor in an 
attempt to modify the mortgage, but he said the creditor would advise him that there 
was a flaw in his credit report or give him some other reason that made him ineligible for 
a loan modification.5 
 
b. Applicant thought that his home was worth about $250,000, and the creditor 
was just interested in foreclosing on it. He noted that a smaller home across the street 
from his house recently sold for $240,000. In his post-hearing submission, he provided 
a document from a real estate website that valued his home at $207,511 and noted that 
comparable homes were selling between $183,000 and $218,000.6 
 
c. When he was served with foreclosure papers in March 2013, Applicant hired a 
lawyer to represent him. His lawyer succeeded twice in blocking the creditor from 
foreclosing on the home. He pays the lawyer $500 monthly and checks each month on 
the lawyer’s progress in resolving this debt. The lawyer has attempted to contact the 
creditor to negotiate a settlement, but the creditor refuses to talk to the lawyer.7 
 
d. Applicant’s original plan was to stay in the home and pay what he agreed in 
the mortgage loan. At the hearing, however, he indicated that he now plans to move into 
                                                          
4 Tr. 31-33, 37-46, 53-56; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2; AE A, B, N.  
5 Tr. 38-45, 47-51, 60-62; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3; AE P, Q, W. 
6 Tr. 44-45, 56, 62-63; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE AH. 
7 Tr. 31-33, 38-45, 47-48, 50-52, 57-64; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2; AE C, X, Y, Z. 
 
4 
 
 
an apartment in May 2015 after his son graduates from high school and attempt to sell 
the home in a short sale. He stated that the second mortgage holder recently indicated 
that it would settle its debt for about $26,000. He believes that he could sell the home 
for about $230,000 and with the proceeds resolve both mortgages. This plan recently 
became a possibility because of the second mortgage holder’s settlement offer.8  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – charged-off account for $419. A credit report dated September 27, 
2013, listed this debt as a credit card account that had a date of last activity of March 
2008. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed this account was reported in error. 
He provided a letter from the creditor dated July 11, 2014, indicating that this account 
would be deleted from his credit report. Two credit reporting agencies were already 
reporting that this account had a zero balance.9  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – charged-off account for $1,500. This debt was a credit card debt 
that had a date of last activity of January 2009. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
provided documentation that he settled and paid this debt for $1,480 in August 2011.10  
 
In February 2015, Applicant completed a money management course. His 
current wife does not work outside the home. With the exception of the mortgages on 
his house, he is current on his financial obligations. A recent credit report confirmed he 
had no other delinquent debts. At the time of the hearing, he had $5,000 in his checking 
account and about $100 in a saving account. The amount in his savings account was 
recently depleted because he paid attorney’s fees for this hearing. Applicant earns 
about $74,000 annually. In his post-hearing submission, he presented a personal 
financial statement that indicated his net monthly income was $5,780, his total monthly 
expenses were $1,450, and his total monthly debt payments were $1,819, which left 
him a net monthly remainder of $3,961. His total monthly debt payments did not include 
payments toward the delinquent mortgage because, as noted above, the creditor will 
not accept them.11  
 
At the hearing, three witnesses testified that Applicant is trustworthy. One of the 
witnesses, Applicant’s manager, traveled a significant distance to testify on his behalf. 
The manager stated that Applicant was “one of our better employees, trusted 
employees and we thought it was worth the effort for me to come down and be a 
character witness to assure the Court that [Applicant], in our opinion, is of high 
character.” Applicant also submitted a number of character reference letters that 
describe him as a true professional who is held in the highest regard.12 
                                                          
8 Tr. 30-33, 38-45, 56-64; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE U. 
9 Tr. 33-34; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3; AE D. 
10 Tr. 34; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3; AE E, F, G. 
11 Tr. 35-37, 45-48, 52-53; AE L, M, O. 
12 Tr. 10-27; AE J, K. 
 
5 
 
 
In the Navy, Applicant was awarded the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, two 
Navy-Marine Corps Commendation Medals, three Navy-Marine Corps Achievement 
Medals, seven Good Conduct Medals, and various service awards.13 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
                                                          
13 AE H, I. 
 
6 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated three delinquent debts totaling approximately $210,000 
that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy for an extended period. Record evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were the result of conditions beyond his control. 
Expenses arising from his marital separation and divorce had a detrimental impact on 
his financial situation. He acted responsibly in resolving a number of delinquent debts 
that his ex-wife incurred while he was deployed to Afghanistan. His only remaining 
delinquent debts are the first and second mortgages on his home. He twice tried to 
rehabilitate the first mortgage by entering into repayment plans, but in both instances 
the creditor made demands that he could not meet. Following the most recent 
repayment plan, he continued to make payments, but the creditor refused them. He 
believes the creditor is only interested in foreclosing on the home. He hired an attorney 
to represent him in resolving the mortgages. This financial problem is not conducive to a 
quick resolution. He has been doing what he can under difficult circumstances to 
address it. Based on a recent settlement offer by the second mortgage holder, he 
believes that he can resolve both mortgages through a short sale. Given the current 
value of the home, his plan appears to be a realistic possibility. The evidence shows 
that Applicant has been persistent in his efforts to address his financial problems. His 
track record of resolving other delinquent debts supports a conclusion that he will 
continue working on the delinquent mortgages in a responsible manner until they are 
resolved.  
 
 Besides the delinquent mortgages, Applicant is financially stable. His financial 
problems occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. He has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances in addressing his financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) 
fully applies. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served honorably in the Navy for 23 years, including in Afghanistan. He 
has worked for his current employer for four years. He is a valued employee. He had 
held a security clearance for many years without any apparent problems. He 
encountered financial problems and has been working persistently to resolve them. I am 
confident that he will continue to act in a responsible manner in addressing the 
delinquent mortgages. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all the 
above reasons, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the financial consideration security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1c:  For Applicant    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
