 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-01798 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated July 16, 2014, Applicant admitted the sole allegation raised in 
the SOR. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on October 
20, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 28, 2014, setting the hearing for 
November 13, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered two documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-2. Applicant offered four documents, which were accepted as Exs. 
A-D. She was given until November 21, 2014, to submit any additional materials. On 
November 24, 2014, the transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received. On November 
25, 2014, nine pages of materials were received from the Government, including a two-
page preface (Hearing Ex. 1) and materials from Applicant, accepted as Ex. E. The 
record was then closed.  
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old assistant wireless manager who has worked for the 
same employer for over a year. She served in the United States Navy for 23 years 
before being honorably discharged in January 2012. Applicant has a master’s degree in 
business administration and a bachelor’s degree in management. She informally 
separated from her husband a year ago, and the two live in separate rental properties. 
The couple has four children, ranging in ages from preschool to mid-20s. Applicant is 
the primary financial resource for the children, herself, and home maintenance. Her 
husband has been steadily employed as a GS-13, step 10, government employee for 
some time. He earns in excess of $100,000 a year. There is no written agreement as to 
which spouse is responsible for particular obligations. At issue in the SOR is a mortgage 
account on a second home property that is past due in the approximate amount of 
$17,320, with a total balance of $280,145.   
 
 In 2007, Applicant and her husband were living in their jointly owned home when 
they heard a neighbor was having financial difficulties. They tried to help by jointly 
purchasing the neighbor’s home. (Tr. 15) A short time later, their local real estate 
market went down, and the couple “got kind of stuck with this home.” (Tr. 15) The 
couple was next adversely affected by a declining job market, which led them to 
relocate to a more costly region. They have been able to maintain that second home as 
a rental property, but the continued obligation of a second mortgage for that home, plus 
renting residences in their new region, has been financially onerous. In addition, 
Applicant’s former house and the rental property are both about 20 years old and in 
need of numerous routine replacements and repairs.  
 
Applicant has maintained contact with her mortgagor since she first became 
delinquent on the second home’s mortgage in 2012. (Tr. 17) Her delinquency was 
fostered by a three-month delay in her retirement pay and a four-month delay in finding 
a new job after her military discharge. (Tr. 29-31) She was again unemployed from 
March 2013 until May 2013, when she accepted a lower paying position, then 
unemployed from October 2013 until January 2014.  
 
Applicant has sought to refinance the second home since 2012. She declined a 
December 2013 offer by the bank that was extended as an alternative to foreclosure. 
(Ex. A) The offer was for a deed in lieu of foreclosure and $35,000 in cash. Applicant 
declined the offer for “sentimental reasons,” hoping to find another way to resolve the 
 
 
 
 
3 
issue. (Tr. 17-19) She also was “afraid to do it, [because she] didn’t know what [she] 
was getting in to.” (sic) (Tr. 19)  
 
After foreclosure was formally entered, Applicant was precluded from making any 
payments without first requesting a loan reinstatement, which she requested in early 
2014. A reinstatement calculation notice was sent on February 26, 2014, indicating that 
reinstatement could be achieved by paying approximately $30,600 by March 10, 2014. 
(Ex. B) Applicant submitted a money order for that amount on March 5, 2014. (Tr. 20; 
Ex. C)  By the end of 2014, however, her attempts to work through the home loan 
modification process with the customer relations manager had failed. She was about 
$20,000 late in loan payments, and the house was again poised for foreclosure, as the 
loan was transferred to a new lender. (Tr. 20-21; Ex. D) Not having received another 
offer of loan reinstatement from the new lender, Applicant fears the new lender does not 
want to work with her. (Tr. 21-22) In the alternative, she is now open to an offer for the 
deed in lieu of foreclosure. (Tr. 22-23)  
 
 The monthly mortgage on the second home, the property purchased in 2007, is 
$2,490. It has been continually rented for the past four years. Renters pay $1,440 a 
month less any repairs incurred. (Tr. 52) Applicant has saved about $7,500 for a future 
offer to reinstate the loan. She last requested a reinstatement the week before the 
hearing. If extended, she hopes her husband will contribute any additional sums needed 
to reinstate the loan. (Tr. 55) Meanwhile, Applicant continues to hope for a loan 
modification. (Tr. 56) She has not fully researched a short sale as a possible solution. 
(Tr. 75-76) It is difficult to discern which spouse pays for what expenses related to the 
properties and other matters at any given time; their shared obligations seem to be 
approached in an ad hoc manner. (See, e.g., Tr. 25-30, 36-38 , 44-47, 63, 72, 81-82) 
 
 There is an incomplete picture of Applicant’s husband’s finances. As for 
Applicant, between the months of April 2014 and October 2014, she had monthly net 
remainders ranging from $793 to $3,954, with only one month (June 2014, the month in 
which Applicant expended additional sums for one child’s graduation and prom) in 
which Applicant had a negative monthly net remainder (-$464). (Government Summary 
of Applicant’s post-hearing submissions)    
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
 
 
 
4 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had over 
$17,000 in delinquent, mortgage-related debt. This is sufficient to invoke two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Four conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue  
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
           Applicant attributes the onset of her financial difficulties to the time following her 
military 2012 discharge, when her pay was delayed, disability payment deferred, and 
she lacked employment. Responsibly, she contacted her lender and tried to negotiate a 
refinance of the mortgage on her second home. With regard to the actual creation of the 
delinquent debt at issue, AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
Since the creation of that debt, however, Applicant has persisted in a spectrum of 
ideas and options, but not settled on a specific plan as to what she wants to do with the 
property. In 2012, she began negotiating for loan refinancing, which she continues to 
pursue. In 2013, she refused a deed in lieu of foreclosure program because of 
“sentimental” attachments to the home she and her husband acquired in 2007, and 
because she did not fully understand the offer. In 2014, she accepted an offer to 
reinstate the loan after it had gone to foreclosure. To do this, in March 2014, she paid 
slightly over $30,000 on less than two weeks notice. By autumn of 2014, however, the 
house was again in arrears for about $20,000 on the mortgage. As for a short sale, she 
has thus far resisted the pursuit of this avenue as a solution. These facts indicate that 
she wants to keep the house, but lacks the wherewithal and necessary approval to do 
so in a consistent manner.  
 
Financial counseling could help her commit to a specific plan. There is no 
evidence, however, she has received any such counseling, obviating applicability of AG 
¶ 20(c) in the absence of any progress. Moreover, actively working in concert with her 
husband to address the debt could fortify efforts to stay the course on a chosen plan. At 
 
 
 
 
6 
present, however, Applicant appears to be the only spouse involved in maintaining this 
property. There appears to be sufficient money within her control to adequately address 
the delinquent debt acquired and now at issue, yet no sustained progress has been 
made on that debt. None of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old assistant wireless manager who has earned a 
bachelor’s degree in management and a master’s degree in business administration. 
She served in the United States military for over two decades.  Currently estranged from 
her husband, she has been raising four children.  
 
Despite her education and life experience, Applicant appears to be muddled as 
to how she can best proceed with regard to a second home with a significant 
delinquency. She has worked to refinance the home since 2012, rejected a 2013 offer to 
a deed in lieu of foreclosure, then expended over $30,000 – a sum greater than the 
amount of the present delinquency – to reinstate the loan after foreclosure. Despite this 
tremendous commitment, the home was again in arrears for nearly $20,000 within a few 
months. As 2014 came to an end, Applicant was still seeking to refinance the home, 
interested in another chance to convey the title in lieu of foreclosure, and seeking 
another opportunity to reinstate the loan. History seems poised to repeat itself as 
Applicant again pursues the same avenues she has pursued in the past few years.  
 
Regardless of which avenue is ultimately chosen, it remains unclear why this 
account is delinquent. Despite early problems with periods of unemployment and delays 
in pay, Applicant has had a steady flow of income over the past year. Even taking into 
consideration unforeseen repairs, Applicant’s net monthly remainders reflect a level of 
income that should be able to satisfy this debt. Indeed, in 2014, on less than two weeks 
notice, she paid over $30,000 to reinstate the loan. Then, despite significant positive net 
monthly remainders, the account again became delinquent. In short, based on her own 
income – and not even factoring in her husband’s joint responsibility for the home – it 
appears she can afford the property at issue. Without evidence showing why she cannot 
 
 
 
 
7 
afford the home or explain away the delinquency, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
