 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03946 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate any notable progress on her delinquent debts. 
Security concerns under Guideline F remain unmitigated. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized on October 24, 2014, 2014, Applicant admitted 26 of the 27 
allegations set forth in the SOR. She also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the 
case on January 29, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 2, 2015, setting 
the hearing for March 12, 2015. With an affirmative waiver of the 15-day notice 
requirement obtained, the hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. The Government’s motion to strike allegations ¶¶ 1.b-1.c was 
granted without objection. Applicant gave testimony and offered six documents, which 
were accepted as Exs. A-F. On March 20, 2015, the transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) 
was received and entered into evidence. The record was then closed.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old group administrator who has worked for the same 
Defense contractor since the end of 2013. She has completed some collegiate 
coursework. She is presently single and has no children. Multiple supporting documents 
speak positively of Applicant’s character and capabilities. (Exs. A-F) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant moved home to be with her mother and father, where she paid 
no rent but contributed to the household in other ways. The following year, her 
pensioner father became ill due to heart disease. He ultimately passed away of cancer 
in 2006, adversely impacting the household finances of Applicant and her retired 
mother. The mother received a reduced share of her late husband’s pension, amounting 
to about $2,600 a month gross, when Social Security was added. In response, Applicant 
moved from a job paying $12 an hour to one offering $16 an hour. Meanwhile, 
Applicant’s sister moved closer to her sibling to help with their mother and to see what 
could be done with the family home, which was in serious disrepair. In 2008, Applicant 
quit her job, desperately unhappy that she had not been provided the necessary training 
to properly execute her duties. Although without work, she received unemployment 
compensation during this time. Also in 2008, her mother was diagnosed with cancer 
while her sister took a part-time position. Applicant tried to manage the household 
coffers while her sister looked after their mother’s well-being.  
 
In 2009, Applicant returned to the workforce, making $20.28 an hour. In 2010, 
the mother was killed in an automobile accident, and the sister lost her job shortly 
thereafter. The mother had no insurance, savings, or investments, and Applicant 
struggled to manage household finances on her salary alone. For the next three years, 
the sisters suffered from multiple medical issues. In particular, Applicant battled cancer 
and endured two surgeries while lacking major medical health coverage. (Tr. 35) Lack 
of that coverage, of which Applicant was initially unaware, resulted in about $17,000 in 
related bills. During that time, in May 2013, Applicant lost her job. Despite these 
challenges, she was able to stretch her salary and meet most of their expenses. Only 
recently has health and normalcy returned to their lives. Applicant began her present 
position in December 2013. She now earns about $31,200 a year after taxes. Her sister 
returned to work full-time in 2014. She earns a gross salary of about $80,000 a year. 
 
The Government stipulated that the two debts noted at ¶¶ 1.b-1.c have been 
satisfied, leaving 25 delinquent debts at issue. Those debts amount to about $31,700 in 
outstanding obligations. They range from $9,889 to $33, with five showing balances 
between $33 and $72. Her approach to these delinquencies has been piecemeal. She 
thought she had satisfied the debt at ¶ 1.a, but an unknown balance later resulted in an 
 
 
 
 
3 
adverse judgment that has yet to be satisfied. (Tr. 37-39) She approached the hospital 
at ¶1.d to see whether she qualified for compassion funds in 2011, but she was turned 
down for them in 2012 or 2013. (Tr. 39-40) The account at ¶ 1.e has not been 
addressed. With the exception of the debt noted at ¶ 1.w for a car loan, the balances 
noted at ¶¶ 1.f-1.x are medically related to her surgeries. (Tr. 40-44) She is currently 
writing to these creditors to learn who the creditors are and how she can resolve the 
debts. (Tr. 43)  
 
Applicant has not yet been able to reach out to the creditors noted at ¶¶ 1.y-1.z, 
or resolve the related debts. (Tr. 44) Applicant denies responsibility for the debt noted at 
¶ 1.aa, noting it is for a medical test she never authorized and that, if performed, should 
have been paid by a third-party. (Tr. 45; SOR Response at 3) She wrote the creditor to 
register her dispute of this balance. (Tr. 46) 
 
At present, Applicant is earning about $2,600 a month. She does not have a car 
payment. Her monthly utilities and telecommunications monthly charges are about 
$580. (Tr. 47-48)  She has a monthly credit card payment of about $250. (Tr. 48) 
Medications and co-pays can go upward from $200 a month. (Tr. 49). Water costs 
about $50 a month, while yard care runs upward from $30 a month. (Tr. 50) Automobile 
maintenance can run a few hundred a year. (Tr. 51) Odd household jobs run to about 
$30 a month. Applicant lends up to $500 a month to her cousin. (Tr. 53)  
 
Applicant is hoping to receive financial counseling. (Tr. 54) She hopes a 
professional service might help her reduce the sums claimed. (Tr. 55) Applicant has 
tried to go through her county to see if any services are available that might help her 
save money or reduce expenses. She has used a local food bank to supplement her 
grocery shopping needs. (Tr. 55) Until her sister returned to work, Applicant was paying 
her sister’s medical and car insurance to assure no accidents or illness proved to be 
financially catastrophic to their household. (Tr. 55-56) She has checked with her credit 
union and creditors to see if any offered credit counseling. (Tr. 56-57) She recently 
enrolled in a service offered as a benefit at work that touts legal services, which she 
hopes will assist her in devising a plan to address her delinquent debts. (Tr. 57-58)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
 
 
 
4 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had over 
$30,000 in delinquent debt. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant suffered a series of unanticipated setbacks and misfortunes between 
2006 and December 2013 that adversely affected her income. For example, the passing 
of both parents in 2006 and 2010, followed by her battle with cancer and subsequent 
surgeries while lacking major medical insurance, and a notable period of unemployment 
in 2013 all contributed toward her financial distress. Various unexpected circumstances 
impacting her mother and sister’s income also added strain to Applicant to the extent 
they further stretched Applicant’s management of household finances. The record 
shows, however, that she persisted in finding higher paying jobs to meet her on-going 
challenges. Given her limited income and the familial obligations for which she took 
responsibilities when family coffers were strained, her finance management must be 
credited for limiting her debt to under $35,000, especially since half of the debts at issue 
are medically related due to her lack of major medical insurance at a time of health 
crisis. With regard to the creation of the delinquent debt at issue, AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
While Applicant may have mitigated security concerns regarding the creation of 
her debts, little evidence has been presented that mitigates their continued delinquency.  
Applicant has yet to receive financial counseling, and she has not investigated whether 
her new legal services subscription offers such counseling or provides any related 
guidance. The payments she has made on the debts at issue were less than persistent 
or consistent, never satisfying the total balance on any of the delinquent debts at issue. 
This includes multiple debts with balances between $33 and $75. While Applicant stated 
 
 
 
 
6 
she disputed the debt noted at ¶ 1.aa, there is no documentary evidence substantiating 
that assertion. Under these facts, and with no evidence that her debts are being 
addressed in a responsible, meaningful, and consistent manner, none of the other 
financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.   
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance 
must be evaluated by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to 
grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature woman with a high school education who attended some 
college. She has advanced herself professionally over the years despite multiple 
personal and work-related set-backs. She is to be commended for her efforts to manage 
her family’s finances during a decade of challenges. The facts tend to explain how her 
debt was initially acquired and became delinquent. They are less persuasive, however, 
with regard to the fact their balances remain virtually untouched. This situation is 
highlighted by the fact that Applicant appreciates her need for professional financial 
counseling or guidance, has been back in the work force with a higher paying job for 
approximately 16 months, and even the five balances ranging between $33 and $72 
remain unpaid. While her situation appears to be the type readily remediated with 
proper counseling, a guaranty to seek such support in the future is insufficient to 
mitigate current security concerns. Consequently, financial considerations security 
concerns remain unmitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
