 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01384 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but failed to 
mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
On August 24, 2014, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she elected 
to have her case decided on the written record. On January 28, 2015,1 Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant on February 10, 2015, and it was received on February 26, 2015. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information that was marked 
as Item 12. There were no objections to any of the documents offered and the 
Government and Applicant’s exhibits are admitted.2 The case was assigned to me on 
April 3, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.m, 1.o, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, 
and 1.w, with explanations She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.u, 1.x and 2.a. 
She failed to admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.p-1.r, 1.y-1.ee and 2.b. Her 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She has been married three times. She has been 
separated from her third husband since 2008. She has three adult children. She has 
worked for a federal contractor since February 2012. She attended college and received 
a diploma.3 
 
 Applicant’s employment history is as follows: From March 2003 to December 
2006, she worked as a customer service representative and held a public trust position. 
From January 2007 to April 2010, she worked for a credit card company. She was 
unemployed from April 2010 to January 2012. She listed in her security clearance 
application (SCA) that she was employed at a nongovernment job from February 2012 
to February 2013. Presumably this was a second job she held while working in her 
current position. 
 
 In 1987, Applicant was arrested and charged with perjury, fraudulently obtaining 
aid, and aiding fraud. In 1989, she was arrested and charged with unlawful food stamps 
and fraud. The disposition of these charges is unknown. In her answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated her husband at the time was trying to gain custody of their children and 
his mother contacted the police to implicate her in criminal offenses. She stated the 
charges were dismissed.4 
 
 In 1994 and 1995, Applicant was arrested and charged with multiple counts of 
simple worthless check. In her answer to the SOR, she indicated that she did not 
                                                          
1 The date on the FORM states 2014, but it is an obvious typographical error and should be 2015. 
 
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum.  
 
3 Item 4. It does not appear Applicant was awarded a degree, but she disclosed receiving a diploma.  
 
4 Items 2, 9, 10, 12. 
 
 
3 
commit the crime of simple worthless checks, but rather her boyfriend at the time took 
her checks and wrote them without her knowledge. She indicated the boyfriend 
admitted his conduct in court and she was released. Documents indicated she was 
found guilty of the charges, fined, and ordered to pay restitution.5  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2004, which was dismissed in 
September 2004. She filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy again in August 2005, and her debts 
were discharged in December 2005. It is unknown the amount of debt that was 
discharged.  
 
 Credit reports from 2013, 2014, and 2015 substantiate all of the debts alleged in 
the SOR.6 Applicant admits the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 
1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, and 1.w. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.y, 1.z, and 1.aa are also 
medical debts that Applicant denied. The total of these debts is approximately $12,278. 
Applicant indicated she is not sure why she would not have paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.y ($26), 1.z ($16), and 1.aa ($6) because of their low amount. She indicated in her 
answer to the SOR that she would determine the creditor and pay the debts. She did 
not provide any other information on what action she has done to dispute, resolve, or 
pay her medical debts.7  
 
 Applicant attributes her medical debts to a period in 2011 when she was sick and 
unemployed. Regarding the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,541), she stated she was 
never notified she owed the debt. She indicated that she moved and the creditor had all 
of her information. She indicated that if the debt is legitimate, she would set up a 
payment plan. She did not provide information regarding action she has taken to resolve 
this debt. She did not recognize the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($65), but intended to pay it. She 
did not provide information on what action she has taken to pay it.8 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r (total balance $8,213) are for student 
loans. Her payments were listed as past due in her May 2014 credit report, and in her 
January 2015 credit report are listed in a forbearance status.9  
 
 Applicant disputed she owes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.u ($488) to a cable company. 
She indicated she was charged for failing to return a cable box, which she stated she 
returned. She did not provide any information on what action she has taken to dispute 
or resolve the debt.10  
 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 9 and 10, 12. 
 
6 Item 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Items 2, 7 and 8. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
4 
 Applicant disputed the debt is SOR ¶ 1.x ($52), indicating she never did business 
with this company. She did not provide any information on what actions she has taken 
to dispute or resolve the debt.11 
 
 Applicant disclosed on her SCA that she had medical debts that were delinquent. 
She disclosed some specific medical bills and other debts that were alleged in the SOR. 
She did not disclose each debt alleged. She stated in her answer to the SOR that she 
had difficulty with the computer version of the SCA, and she was unaware of each debt 
that was listed on her credit report as she had never checked it. Her disclosures put the 
Government on notice that she had financial problems. Based on the numerous 
disclosures on her SCA regarding her delinquent debts, I find she did not deliberately 
fail to disclose her delinquent debts.12  
 
 Applicant noted that she is not a bad person. She made some poor choices in 
the men she dated. She has been working for two years for her current employer and 
has had no problems. She loves her job. The criminal charges happened many years 
ago. She previously held a public trust position. She has a good work ethic. She 
indicated that she has more bills than money, and is like many other people. Her 
medical debts were attributed to being uninsured and unemployed for a period of time. 
She indicated that she is paying her debts a few at a time. She is trying to better 
manage her finances. She now has a good job with good health insurance. She cannot 
change the past, but is trying to do better in the future.13 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
                                                          
11 Item 2. 
 
12 Items 2 and 4. 
 
13 Items 2 and 12. 
 
5 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
 
6 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
  
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 that was dismissed. She filed again 
in 2005 and had her debts discharged. Applicant has 22 alleged delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $14,151. She is unable to pay them. Her student loans were past 
due for a period. She was found guilty of simple worthless checks in 1994 and 1995. 
She was charged in 1987 with perjury, fraudulently obtaining aid, and aiding fraud. She 
was charged in 1989 with unlawful food stamps and fraud. Applicant has a long history 
of being unable or unwilling to meet her financial obligations, and previously engaged in 
financial breaches of trust. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s criminal arrests and convictions happened under unique 
circumstances, in which her boyfriend and former husband were involved in the 
offenses. These charges happened more than twenty years ago and there is no 
evidence of criminal activity since then. Due to the passage of time and the unusual 
circumstances in which these offenses occurred, I find AG ¶ 20(a) applies to SOR ¶¶ 
1.bb through 1.ee. It does not apply to the other delinquent debts alleged because they 
remain unpaid and unresolved. 
 
 
7 
  Applicant experienced an extended period of unemployment. She had medical 
problems, was uninsured, and unable to pay her bills. These conditions were beyond 
her control. To fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant 
has been employed since February 2012. She was aware her delinquent debts were a 
security concern, promised to pay some of the smaller debts, but failed to do so. She 
has not provided any financial plan or budget to address the debts. She disputed some 
debts, but did not contact any of the creditors to formally dispute the legitimacy of the 
debt, nor provide documented proof to substantiate the dispute or evidence of actions 
she has taken to resolve the debts. Applicant’s student loans are in forbearance and are 
resolved in her favor. AG ¶ 20(c) applies to those debts. Applicant has not initiated 
good-faith efforts to pay or resolve her other delinquent debts. There is no evidence she 
has received financial counseling or that her financial problems are under control. AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply to the remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 sets out the trustworthiness concern relating to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under personal conduct AG ¶ 16 
and the following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant disclosed numerous delinquent debts on her SCA. She had difficulty 
with the electronic SCA. She did not disclose each delinquent debt alleged, but did put 
the Government on notice of her financial problems. I find she did not deliberately fail to 
disclose delinquent debts. Therefore, none of the above disqualifying conditions apply. I 
find in her favor for SOR ¶ 2.a.  
 
8 
 Applicant was arrested in 1987, 1989, 1994 and 1995 for perjury, fraudulently 
obtaining aid, fraud, unlawful food stamps, and simple worthless checks. AG ¶ 16(c) 
applies. Her arrests reflect conduct that shows questionable judgment and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (b) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
 Applicant indicated that her criminal arrests and convictions happened under 
unique circumstances, involving her boyfriend and former husband. These charges 
happened more than twenty years ago, and there is no evidence of criminal activity 
since then. She no longer associates with these men. Due to the passage of time and 
the unique circumstances in which these offenses occurred, such conduct is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. AG ¶17(c) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
9 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She has a history of financial problems and inability to 
pay her debts. After having her delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2005, she 
again accumulated delinquent debts. Some of her inability to pay her debts was caused 
by unemployment and not having medical insurance. She has been employed since 
February 2012, but has not made an effort to pay even the smallest debts alleged. She 
did not provide a plan for resolving her debts. Her financial problems are not under 
control. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, but failed to mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.p-1.r:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.s-1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.bb-1.ee:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs: 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
