 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02214 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 4, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 4, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 27, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 18, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
March 23, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted AE H, 
which was admitted without objection and the record closed.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and denied the remaining 
allegations. His admission is incorporated in the findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1993. He served on 
active duty in the Marines from 1985 to 1990 and with the Marine Reserves from 1990 
to 2007, when he retired as an E-7. He served in combat in 2003, during Operation Iraqi 
Freedom. While serving in the Marine Corps, Applicant was awarded a Meritorious 
Service Medal, the Navy-Marine Corps Commendation Medal (three awards) and the 
Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal (three awards). He was married from 1990 to 
2009. He has two children, ages 20 and 12, who reside with him. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2006 and with his current employer since 2013. He has held a 
security clearance since approximately 1986.2 
 
 Applicant testified that while he was married he went to work, and his wife paid 
the bills. He did not pay much attention to the finances until his wife told him they did not 
have money to pay their bills. She had been spending beyond their means and was 
using credit cards to pay other credit cards. Applicant stated that during their marriage 
they had moved and sold houses and made a profit, but there was no money left. He 
admitted he was neglectful in not being more involved in the management of their 
finances.3  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($380) was a corporate credit card. Applicant kept a 
separate account to pay his business expenses. He had arranged that when his travel 
claim was paid the money would be deposited directly into this account, thereby 
ensuring the money deposited would be used to pay this credit card bill. When Applicant 
separated from his wife in 2008, the bills for this credit card continued to go to the 
marital home where he was no longer living. He was unaware that his wife had not paid 
the bill until it was brought to his attention during his background investigation. Upon 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a memorandum from Department Counsel forwarding Applicant’s exhibits and noting 
the Government had no objections. 
 
2 Tr. 10, 23-26; AE B. 
 
3 Tr. 27. 
 
 
3 
 
 
learning of the debt, Applicant contacted the creditor and paid the debt. The debt is 
resolved.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($9,016) is for a student loan. In approximately January 
2007, Applicant’s wife went back to school. She was not credit worthy, and in order for 
her to obtain a student loan Applicant cosigned for it. When they divorced each party 
was responsible for their own debts. He believed his wife was responsible for this debt. 
He testified that during the pre-divorce discussions between his attorney and his wife’s 
attorney it was agreed that the student loan was his wife’s debt. The credit report 
supports that after the divorce for at least 17 of a 24-month period payments toward this 
debt were made by his ex-wife. At some point, his wife stopped making payments. 
Applicant stated he was never notified by the creditor that the debt was delinquent.5  
 
Pertinent parts of the divorce decree state:  
 
Each party shall be solely responsible for all debts in his or her own name 
with the exception of the bill due to [X] Law Firm Debt Consolidation the 
balance is $56,607 and the monthly payment is $614. Each party shall pay 
½ directly to the Creditor until paid in full. 
 
* * * 
 
The Husband shall deliver to the Wife promptly any credit cards in his 
possession for any charge accounts maintained in the name of the Wife. 
The Wife shall deliver to the Husband promptly any credit cards in her 
possession for any charge accounts maintained in the Husband’s name.  
 
* * * 
 
Should either party attempt to file for bankruptcy protection to attempt to 
discharge the above obligations to or on behalf of the other party, the 
parties acknowledge that any and all balances unpaid are considered a 
domestic support obligation such that they shall be exempt from 
dischargeability pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(5).6 
 
 In approximately 2007, Applicant and his wife contracted with a law firm to assist 
them in consolidating their debts, negotiate settlements, and resolve their debts. 
Applicant stated that all of their delinquent debts were for credit cards and the total 
owed was about $56,000. They would make monthly payments to X law firm. They 
would occasionally receive a notice from X law firm that an account was either paid or 
                                                          
4 Tr. 28-30. The Government stipulated there was proper documentation to support the debt was 
resolved. 
 
5 Tr. 30-35. 
 
6 AE F. 
 
4 
 
 
written-off. Applicant believed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($12,680), which is a debt for a 
joint credit card, was included in this plan. Applicant provided a spreadsheet showing 
that in accordance with the divorce decree he and his wife were both required to 
continue to pay one-half of the $614 monthly payment to the law firm to resolve the 
balance of the consolidated debt. Each was to deposit their half of the payment into an 
account and then the monthly payment would be made from that account automatically. 
Applicant continued to pay his half of the payment until he learned that his ex-wife 
stopped making her half of the payment because she filed bankruptcy. He learned that 
the bank account was being charged for nonsufficient funds due to his ex-wife’s failure 
to make her deposit so the account did not have the required funds to make the 
automatic payment. Applicant estimated that he stopped making deposits into the 
account when his wife filed bankruptcy sometime in February or March 2012. He stated 
that when the account was no longer making automatic payments, he assumed that the 
debt was resolved through his ex-wife’s bankruptcy.7   
 
 Applicant did not have any documentation from the law firm that the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.c was resolved. He stated that he attempted to locate the firm, but was unable. He 
researched via the Internet to find an address or telephone number but was 
unsuccessful. He knows there is a large file that has documents pertaining to the martial 
debts and correspondence from the law firm, but his ex-wife had it, and he is unable to 
locate her. He now resides in the marital residence, but has not received any new 
correspondence from the law firm. The debt no longer appears on Applicant’s credit 
report.8  
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife was initially awarded custody of their children, and Applicant 
was to pay child support. In 2010, their daughter moved in with Applicant. He continued 
to pay his ex-wife the full amount of child support for the two children. Sometime in 
2012, Applicant’s wife wanted to move to a new state and take their son. They went 
back to court to settle the custody dispute, and his wife failed to show for the hearing. 
Applicant was awarded sole custody of the children at that time and his ex-wife was to 
pay child support. Applicant’s ex-wife has had no contact with him or their daughter. 
She occasionally will call the son on his cell phone. She has never paid the court-
ordered child support. Applicant lives within his means and pays his bills on time. He is 
supporting his son and is paying his daughter’s college expenses.9 
 
 Applicant’s commander during combat operations in 2003 provided a character 
letter. He described Applicant has “one of our best Staff Non-Commissioned Officers.” 
He believes Applicant is a man of integrity. He described Applicant as the consummate 
battalion level operations staff non-commissioned officer and “go to” senior enlisted 
Marine. He was instrumental in ensuring all of the command’s junior Marines were 
                                                          
7 Tr. 35-48; AE G. 
 
8 Tr. 41-42, 49-53; AE H. 
 
9 Tr. 59-68. 
 
 
5 
 
 
prepared in the high tempo environment of combat. He repeatedly exercised sound 
judgment and was essential to the mission’s success. His loyalty, initiative, courage 
under enemy fire, caring leadership style, and organizational ability were without peer.10  
 
 A character letter was provided by Applicant’s current senior reporting official. He 
described Applicant as an “intelligent self-starting individual” who is a person of integrity 
and dependability, both personally and professionally.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE A. 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant cosigned on a student loan for his wife that became delinquent and had 
two delinquent credit card accounts totaling approximately $13,080. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant was married from 1990 to 2009. His wife handled the finances until 
2007 when he learned that she was spending beyond their financial means. They 
contracted with X law firm to consolidate and help resolve their delinquent debts. When 
Applicant and his wife divorced they were both required to continue to pay one-half of 
the payment to the X law firm to continue resolving their debts. Applicant continued to 
make his payments, but his ex-wife stopped when she filed bankruptcy. Applicant 
credibly testified that although he cosigned for his ex-wife’s student loan, she was 
required to make the payments after their divorce, and apparently did for 17 months and 
then stopped when she filed bankruptcy. Applicant was unaware that the credit card 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was unpaid. When he learned it was delinquent he paid it. The 
circumstances that impacted Applicant’s finances are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant is actively 
managing his finances, and he is no longer married. He is living within his means. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce and his ex-wife’s failure to continue her student loan 
payments and payments to X law firm were beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies to the facts. He admittedly was neglectful in not monitoring the familial finances 
while he was married. This was within his control. For the full application of the 
mitigating condition, Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
He paid the corporate credit card and made payments to X law firm until his ex-wife 
stopped paying her half. He attempted to contact X law firm, but was unable to locate it. 
He does not know where his ex-wife is living, and he was unable to retrieve the 
paperwork regarding X law firm. Under the circumstances, Applicant acted responsibly. 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant paid the corporate credit card alleged. Although he made payments on 
the other credit card in SOR ¶ 1.c, once he learned his ex-wife was no longer paying 
her half he stopped payments. The debt no longer appears on his credit report. It 
appears his ex-wife was responsible for paying the student loan debt and did until she 
filed bankruptcy. Applicant is living within his means and taking care of his children, 
without receiving the court-ordered child support from his ex-wife. Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. He paid his corporate credit card. AG ¶ 
20(d) applies to that debt.  
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He is a retired Marine who served in combat and 
receives high praise from his former commander and current supervisor. He admitted 
that while he was married his wife took care of their finances. She spent money beyond 
their means, and when he learned of the problems they were already deep in debt. 
They initiated a consolidation program to settle and resolve their debts. They abided by 
the monthly payment schedule even after they divorced until his ex-wife stopped making 
her share of the payment. The student loan debt was for Applicant’s ex-wife, and she 
paid it after their divorce until she apparently stopped when she filed bankruptcy. 
Applicant appears to have his finances in order. Although there is some question as to 
the current status of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, it is no longer listed on his current credit 
report. Applicant is caring for his children without the benefit of child support that was 
court-ordered. He does not have other delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
