 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03061 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On September 2, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On December 2, 2014, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided 
to Applicant on December 3, 2014 and it was received on December 29, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. The 
Government’s exhibits (Items 1 through 7), and Applicant’s exhibits are admitted. The 
case was assigned to me on March 12, 2014. I held the record open until April 20, 2015, 
to allow Applicant to submit additional information, which he did. It is marked Item 8.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not affirmatively admit or deny the allegations in the SOR. 
Therefore, I will consider the two allegations as denials. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He married in 1988. He has two sons, ages 25 and 22. 
He retired from a state agency in early 2002, after working twenty years, and receives a 
pension. He has worked as a federal contractor since 2002. He has held a security 
clearance since 2001. 
 
 Applicant’s credit report reflects two delinquent mortgages.2 In Applicant’s 
response to the FORM, he stated he began having financial problems when his young 
son was gravely ill. His son required on-going treatments, hospitalization, and surgery. 
The treatments required his wife to quit her job to stay home and care for their sick son. 
At the same time, Applicant’s employer decreased his workload by forty percent. These 
events created a financial hardship for the family.3 The mortgage debt alleged in the 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($106,881) became delinquent in approximately March 2012.4 He indicated 
that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($11,176), a second mortgage was settled in 2010 with three 
payments over a three month period.5  
 
 In a letter dated June 2013 provided to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant 
requested the creditor consider his application for a loan modification. He explained that 
his son developed a medical condition sometime in 2008. It is unclear when his wife left 
her job, but sometime later she resumed work, but could only find temporary 
employment, which ended approximately six months later. She was not eligible for 
unemployment benefits because of her temporary work status. It is unknown how long 
she was out of work. She commenced full-time employment in August 2011. Applicant 
                                                          
1 Item 9 is Department Counsel’s memorandum reflecting the Government did not object to the 
submission of the additional document. 
 
2 Item 6. 
 
3 Response to FORM. 
 
4 Item 7. 
 
5 Answer to SOR; Item 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
indicated in his letter, that although both he and his wife are working their salaries are 
lower, and they have fewer benefits.6  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated he made immediate contact with 
the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a in an attempt to work out a plan regarding his mortgage 
payments.7 He stated that despite his constant communication, the creditor was 
unresponsive and denied his requests. He provided a loan modification application and 
correspondence from June 2013. Applicant indicated in his answer to the FORM that 
legal action by his state’s attorney general’s office on behalf of those holding mortgages 
with this creditor prompted the creditor to begin to resolve the delinquent mortgages 
they held. Applicant provided a letter from the creditor dated June 2013 requesting 
additional information and a letter from October 2014, advising Applicant of who his 
point of contact is with the creditor. Applicant indicated in his response to the FORM 
that the loan modification process is slow, but as required by federal law the creditor is 
working on the modification.  
 
Applicant indicated that he is expanding his business to presumably increase his 
income and that since his wife has returned to work, he is working hard to satisfy all of 
their financial obligations and become current on their payments.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
6 Response to FORM with attachments. 
 
7 Applicant did not provide a date of when he contacted the creditor. 
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant had two delinquent mortgage debts totaling approximately $118,057 
that became delinquent in approximately 2010 and 2011. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant began having financial problems when his son became sick in 2008, 
and sometime later his wife had to quit her job to stay home and care for him. In 
addition, Applicant’s workload at the time, decreased by forty percent. The mortgage 
loan in SOR ¶ 1.a became delinquent in March 2012.9 He has been attempting to 
modify this loan. He resolved the mortgage debt in SOR ¶ 1.b in 2010 with three 
payments to the creditor in March, April, and May 2010. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because Applicant is still resolving his delinquent mortgage.  
 
There is ample evidence to show that the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problems were largely beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) 
there must be evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant provided documents to show that he is attempting to obtain a loan 
modification for the delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. In 2010 he resolved the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. There is no evidence Applicant has received 
financial counseling. There is some evidence to show Applicant is attempting to resolve 
the large mortgage debt through a loan modification. Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. Therefore, 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to that debt.  
 
                                                          
9 Item 7. 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He worked for a state agency for twenty years and 
receives a pension. His son became sick and his wife stopped working to care for him. 
There was a downturn in the economy which impacted his business. Applicant is 
attempting to resolve the delinquent mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.a through a loan modification. 
This process is long and cumbersome and the delay in resolving this debt is not 
attributed to him. He resolved his other debt in 2010. There is sufficient evidence to 
meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
