1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02778 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on June 5, 
2013. On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 30, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case 
be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on December 8, 2014. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
December 21, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on January 6, 2015. He had 30 
days to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit matters in response to the 
FORM. On March 11, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and was 
assigned to me on March 13, 2015. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old consultant of a Department of Defense contractor. This 
is his first time applying for a security clearance. He received his bachelor’s degree in 
May 2013. He is currently enrolled in law school. He is single and has no children. (Item 
5)   
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant admits to using and purchasing marijuana with varying frequency from 
November 2006 to March 2013. He admits to using mushrooms (psilocybin) in April 
2008 and ecstasy in December 2010. (Item 1) He listed his illegal drug abuse in 
response to section 23 on his security clearance application, which he certified on June 
5, 2013. (Item 5, section 23)   
 
 Regarding his marijuana use, Applicant stated on his e-QIP, “I have intermittently 
smoked marijuana in high school and college. At times it may have been more frequent 
than other times.”  He indicated that he used to use marijuana as a “crutch.” He does 
not intend to use marijuana again. He will never do anything to jeopardize any future 
opportunity that is given to him. Applicant purchased marijuana with friends from high 
school and college on an infrequent basis from October 2006 to January 2013. (Item 5, 
section 23)  
 
Applicant admits to using hallucinogenic mushrooms while on spring break his 
junior year in high school in April 2008. He states it was a terrible decision and he has 
only used it once. In December 2010, he took ecstasy, which was given to him at a New 
Year’s Eve party. This was a one-time use and he does not intend to use ecstasy again.  
(Item 5, section 23)  
 
Item 6 of the Government’s FORM is a summary of Applicant’s interview with the 
investigator conducting his background investigation, dated July 11, 2013. The 
summary of Applicant’s interview is part of the Report of Investigation related to 
Applicant’s background investigation.  The Directive, ¶ E3.1.20 states: “ An ROI may be 
received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence (28 U.S.C. 101 et seq. (reference (d)).” Item 6 was not 
properly authenticated. I did not consider it when deliberating Applicant’s case.  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits his illegal drug use tends, “…to 
represent a certain unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I have 
made mistakes in my past, and I know that ultimately I am the one who faces the 
consequences of such actions.” He states that he is a decent, hardworking individual. 
He enrolled in law school in the fall 2014. He is truly sorry for his past conduct. If given 
the opportunity to be granted a security clearance, he will do so with “the utmost 
professionalism and discretion.” (Item 4)  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse); and 
 
AG & 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from November 2006 to March 
2013. He used illegal drugs as a “crutch.” He used hallucinogenic mushrooms on one 
occasion in 2008 while in high school. He used ectasy once on New Year’s Eve 2010.   
AG & 25(a) applies. AG & 25(c) also applies because Applicant occasionally purchased 
marijuana.  
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and  
  
AG & 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation).  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because more than two years have passed since Applicant’s 
last illegal use of marijuana. He indicated that he stopped using marijuana in March 
2013 because he wanted to focus on his future.  Most of Applicant’s illegal drug use 
occurred when he was a college student. Upon graduation from college, he applied and 
was accepted to law school. He is now a law student. He was forthcoming when 
disclosing his illegal drug use on his security clearance application and apologizes for 
his behavior.  Applicant appears to understand the security concern involving illegal 
drug use. It is unlikely that he will jeopardize his future by returning to illegal drug use.   
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant has not used illegal drugs for over two 
years. Aside from a one-time experimental use of hallucinogenic mushrooms in 2008 
and a one-time experimental use of ecstasy in December 2010, Applicant’s drug of 
choice was marijuana. His illegal drug use occurred during high school and college. He 
has matured and is focused on his future. While he did not provide a signed statement 
of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, he did express his 
intent to never use marijuana again in response to questions in Section 23 of his 
security clearance application.  Applicant met his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In addition to Applicant’s illegal drug 
use, I considered he fully disclosed his illegal drug use on his security clearance 
application. More than two years have passed since his illegal drug use. Applicant is a 
law student and understands the consequences that additional illegal drug use may 
have on his future.  Applicant met his burden to overcome his illegal drug use while a 
high school and college student.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
