 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01973 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on February 18, 2015. The evidence included in the FORM 
 
2 
 
 
is identified as Items 1-6 and is admitted into the record. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant who received it on February 27, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted 
Items 7-9, which were admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on April 
16, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d and 1.g – 1.i. He 
denied ¶¶ 1.e – 1.f and 1.j. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is divorced from his first wife and separated, 
pending divorce, from his second wife. He has three children ages 20, 19, and 17. He 
holds an associate’s degree. He briefly served in the USMC, but was released from 
service with an entry level discharge.1  
  
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to file and pay his federal and state income 
taxes for year 2009 and that he owes delinquent taxes in the amount of approximately 
$9,336 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b). The SOR lists eight delinquent debts totaling $6,842. The 
debts include three student loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g) and five consumer 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h – 1.j). The debts and the delinquent taxes are supported 
by credit reports from January 2014 and February 2015 and by Applicant’s interview 
with a defense investigator in January 2014.2 
 
 The status of the taxes and debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b: 
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file his 2009 federal tax return. Department 
Counsel conceded that since Applicant was a resident of a state that did not have a 
state income tax, he had no obligation to file a state tax return. Applicant provided 
documentation showing that he filed his federal return and set up a payment plan with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to pay his 2009 federal taxes. He completed his 
payment plan in March 2015. These tax issues are resolved.3 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3-4. 
 
2 Items 4-6. 
 
3 Items 2, 4, 7-8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.g: 
 
 Applicant incurred these three student loan accounts in approximately 2001. He 
failed to voluntarily pay the loans. In October 2012, a garnishment order was issued 
against his wages in the amount of approximately $200 per pay period. He did not 
supply copies of his earnings statements to show that the garnishment took place. He 
claims that these student loan accounts were paid in full, but failed to supply any 
corroborating evidence.4 These debts are unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f: 
 
 The January 2014 credit report shows these are collection accounts and with 
balances of $2,048 and $653. The date of last activity for SOR ¶ 1.e was May 2011 and 
the date of the balance was June 2011. The date of last activity and the date of the 
balance SOR ¶ 1.f was February 2009. Applicant claimed he paid ¶ 1.e, but did not offer 
documentary evidence of payment. He claimed no knowledge of ¶ 1.f. These debts are 
unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i: 
 
 Applicant admitted both of these debts, but claimed they have been paid. He 
failed to offer documentary evidence showing payment. These debts are unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: 
 
 Applicant denied knowledge of this debt. The January 2014 credit report shows 
account #39025691 in the amount of $274 as having a date of last action and date of 
the balance as August 2013. This is a telecommunications account. This debt is 
unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.9 
                                                          
4 In his FORM response (Item 7), Applicant asked for more time to submit a letter from the student loan 
creditor showing the debt was paid in full. Applicant had plenty of time to gather supporting evidence to 
show his student loan payments, but he failed to produce anything after January 2014, when he was 
interviewed by an investigator, or in October 2014 when he submitted his SOR answer, or after February 
2015 when he received a copy of the FORM. Since he failed to show good cause, his request is denied. 
 
5 Items 2, 7-8. 
 
6 Items 2, 5. 
 
7 Items 2, 5. 
 
8 Items 2, 5. 
 
9 Items 2, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file Federal . . . income tax returns as required . . . . 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He also failed 
to file and pay his federal income taxes for 2009. I find all the disqualifying conditions 
are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant did not present evidence that the debts were due to circumstances 
beyond his control. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant presented no evidence of 
financial counseling. He presented evidence that he filed and completely paid his 2009 
federal income taxes. These tax issues have been resolved. However, the remaining 
debts are unresolved. I find AG ¶ 20(c) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b., but not to the 
remaining allegations. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. He failed to supply documentary 
evidence to show that he paid any of the non-tax debts. He also failed to document his 
dispute of SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.j. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not shown a track 
record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
