 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02597 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes approximately $26,308 in delinquent debt with no evidence of 
payment or current payment plans. Some documented progress toward resolving or settling 
these debts is needed before I can conclude that his financial difficulties are no longer of 
security concern. Clearance is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 17, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his security clearance 
eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on August 19, 2014 (Answer). He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). On October 2, 2014, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. I issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the 
hearing for November 18, 2014. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government submitted five exhibits (GEs 
1-5) and the Applicant submitted four exhibits (AEs A-D), all of which were admitted without 
any objections. A chart, which was prepared by Department Counsel as a supplement to 
his oral closing argument, was marked as a hearing exhibit, but not accepted as a formal 
exhibit in the record. Applicant and his department manager testified, as reflected in a 
transcript (Tr.) received on November 29, 2014. 
 
At Applicant’s request, I held the record open for two weeks after the hearing for him 
to submit additional documentary evidence. No documents were received. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline F that Applicant owed delinquent debt totaling 
$26,754 on 11 accounts (SOR 1.a-1.k) as of July 17, 2014. When Applicant responded to 
the SOR, he admitted all the debts. He explained that the $17,160 debt (SOR 1.a) was for 
a repossessed vehicle that was sold at an auction. He “lost sight of the remaining amount 
due.” The $3,991 debt (SOR 1.b) was for utility services at a former residence incurred 
after he vacated the premises, and the utility company apparently failed to shut off the gas. 
The $2,480 debt (SOR 1.c) was for data usage charges that he disputed without success. 
About his remaining debts (SOR 1.d-1.k), Applicant indicated he was looking into 
repayment options. He was working through a debt resolution firm to consolidate his 
current debt. (Answer.) Before the introduction of any evidence at his hearing, it became 
clear that he was disputing his responsibility for the utility service debt in SOR 1.b. In his 
testimony, he expressed his belief that the debt in SOR 1.f was referred for collection to the 
assignee in SOR 1.e. After reviewing the evidence, I accept that SOR 1.e and SOR 1.f are 
the same debt. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old operations supervisor with a defense contractor. He 
graduated from a vocational and technical high school in June 2000, and has worked for 
his current employer since March 2003. He has been a salaried employee since late 
November 2004, when he became a supervisor at an annual wage of $52,000. From 
August 2003 to December 2009, Applicant held a second job part-time with an automotive 
parts dealer as a parts and sales manager. Applicant seeks to retain the secret-level 
security clearance, which was granted to him around April 2003. (GE 1; Tr. 26-28.) 
 
 3 
Applicant and his spouse have been married since October 2003. They have four 
sons, ages 6, 9, 11, and 13. (GE 1.) They also have a daughter, who was born in March 
2013. (GE 5; Tr. 61.) Applicant and his spouse lived with his parents until April 2004, when 
they began renting their own home. The family has been in their current residence since 
March 2009. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant opened a succession of car loans over the years, which caused some 
strain on his family’s finances. In March 2004, he paid off a $12,732 car loan of only nine 
months, taking on a new loan of $21,400. One year later, he paid off that loan and took on 
a loan of $37,177 for a new 2004 model-year SUV. He was working substantial overtime 
and believed he could afford the car payment. In August 2006, his loan, with a balance of 
$32,676, was sold to another creditor. By April 2008, he could no longer keep up with his 
$653 monthly payment on that car loan. He voluntarily surrendered the vehicle, and it was 
sold at an auction, leaving a deficiency balance of $17,160 on his loan (SOR 1.a). (GEs 3, 
4; Tr. 29-32.) When Applicant paid off a June 2006 vehicle loan of $22,762 in November 
2012, he took on a car loan of $29,280 for a 2011 or 2012 minivan for his spouse, to be 
repaid at $655 per month. In September 2013, he paid off a $13,965 auto loan opened in 
August 2010 and took on a $15,500 loan for his 2007 model-year truck, to be repaid at 
$405 per month.
1
 (GEs 3-5; Tr. 28-37, 57-58.) 
 
Between June 2007 and June 2013, Applicant had several other accounts referred 
for collection: a credit card debt of $572 (SOR 1.i), which went to judgment in June 2011; a 
wireless phone debt (SOR 1.e); a $78 Internet services debt (SOR 1.h); an auto insurance 
debt of $207 (SOR 1.k); medical debts of $174 (SOR 1.j) and $346 (SOR 1.g); a $3,991 
utility (natural gas) debt (SOR 1.b); a phone/Internet/cable bundle debt for data usage over 
a wireless router of $2,480 (SOR 1.c); and a wireless phone debt of $832 with his current 
provider (SOR 1.d). (GEs 3, 4; Tr. 39-55.) 
 
Around April 2012, Applicant and his spouse took a seven-day vacation cruise to the 
Caribbean. (GE 5; Tr. 73.) Applicant paid between $5,000 and $6,000 for the cruise. (Tr. 
67-68.) He borrowed from his 401(k) to pay for the trip. (Tr. 67.) 
  
On March 12, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his security 
clearance eligibility. Applicant responded negatively to the financial record inquiries 
concerning any delinquencies involving enforcement, including any judgments entered 
against him in the last seven years. He answered “Yes” to any delinquency involving 
routine accounts. He disclosed that his 2004 SUV had been repossessed voluntarily for 
nonpayment and that the “remainder price” of $17,160 had been charged off. Applicant 
listed no other debts. (GE 1.) As of March 16, 2013, Applicant’s credit report showed 
several previously undisclosed delinquencies (SOR 1.d-1.k), including a $572 judgment 
from June 2011 of “unknown” disposition (SOR 1.k). (GE 4.) 
 
                                                 
1 
Applicant showed a preference for making car payments on a newer vehicle rather than drive an older model 
that was completely paid for. 
 
 4 
On March 28, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant admitted that around March 2008, he 
could no longer make the payments on the SUV that he had at that time. He contacted his 
creditor to negotiate a payment he could afford, but the creditor would not work with him. 
Applicant expressed his belief that the debt was satisfied through repossession and sale of 
the vehicle. Applicant indicated that he would make inquiry to determine whether any 
balance was owed, and if so, pay off the debt as soon as possible. At the end of his 
interview, Applicant was confronted about the other debts on his credit record. Applicant 
speculated that the debts might be medical because he had been injured on the job. The 
debt in SOR 1.g (balance $373) was for ambulance charges incurred when he was on 
temporary duty (TDY) for his employer in 2011. He indicated that the debt should have 
been paid by worker’s compensation. About the $572 judgment on the credit card debt 
(SOR 1.i), Applicant explained that he gave his spouse access to his account for 
emergencies; that he made timely payments on the account; and that he paid it off in 2010. 
He described his current financial status as good and attributed his financial problems to 
unforeseen events, such as overtime becoming unavailable and hospital visits. (GE 5.)  
 
Applicant’s spouse had a complicated pregnancy and birth for their daughter in 
March 2013, resulting in approximately $800 to $900 of non-covered medical expenses. 
(Tr. 83.) In 2014, one of Applicant’s sons had several dental procedures that cost Applicant 
at least $1,500. (Tr. 84.) 
 
 As of April 7, 2014, Applicant had reportedly made no progress toward resolving the 
following delinquencies: $17,160 charged off on his loan for the repossessed SUV (SOR 
1.a); $3,991 in past-due natural gas debt (SOR 1.b); $2,480 for Internet services (SOR 
1.c); $832 in wireless phone services (SOR 1.d); $446 in wireless phone debt from 2008 
(SOR 1.e and 1.f); the $373 ambulance debt (SOR 1.g); $73 for cable services (SOR 1.h); 
and the $572 credit card judgment from June 2011 (SOR 1.i). The $174 medical debt 
(SOR 1.j) and the $207 insurance debt (SOR 1.k) were no longer on his credit record as 
reported by Equifax, although there is also no evidence of repayment. Applicant had fallen 
behind 30 days on his current car loans in early 2014, although his accounts were up-to-
date as of March 2014. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant provided various explanations about his failure to resolve the debts. After 
his vehicle was repossessed, he “kind of lost sight of [the loan].” (Tr. 32, 37.) Then, after 
his March 2013 interview, he was “swamped with work.” Since late 2013, he has had 
separate TDY assignments of three months and 3.5 weeks and two trips of one week 
each.
2 
(Tr. 38.) In July 2014, Applicant went on TDY for 20 days. (Tr. 98, 101-102.) About 
the natural gas bill in SOR 1.b, Applicant maintains that he paid the bill for the last month at 
the property and received no bills about the debt until after he contacted the creditor in 
2014. He had no success in disputing it with the creditor. (Tr. 40-41.) As for the $2,480 
                                                 
2 
About reimbursement for company employees on TDY, Applicant’s department manager indicated that when 
the work assignment exceeds 31 days, the company provides an extended work package consisting of a 15% 
increase in usual wages and per diem in accord with the federal per diem rate for the location. Of TDY fewer 
than 31 days, the employee receives his or her normal wages and reimbursement for travel costs (hotel, car 
rental, etc.). (Tr. 99-100.) 
 
 5 
Internet services debt in SOR 1.c, Applicant testified that he was billed approximately 
$1,800 in data over-usage charges one month in 2012 through use of a “Jetpack” wireless 
router. He disputed the debt immediately and cancelled his service. The provider assessed 
him an early termination fee, but did not remove the charge because an alternative source 
for the data usage could not be determined. Applicant did not pay the debt because he 
does not believe that he incurred the balance. The creditor was unwilling to settle the debt 
for less than its full balance. (Tr. 44-47.) Applicant testified that he had paid the debt in 
SOR 1.d, and that he had been told by the provider that there is no $832 outstanding 
balance on his account. (Tr. 48-49.) He provided no proof of payment. Applicant did not 
pay the debts in SOR 1.e (duplicated in SOR 1.f), SOR 1.h, SOR 1.j, and SOR 1.k 
because he did not know about them. (Tr. 49, 52, 55.) He asserts that the ambulance fee 
in SOR 1.g should have been covered by workmen’s compensation, and he did not realize 
that the debt was on his record. (Tr. 51.) About the judgment in SOR 1.i, Applicant 
maintains that he paid the debt by credit card when he received notice of the court action. 
(Tr. 53.) He presented no proof of payment. 
 
 After Applicant received the SOR, he contacted the creditor in SOR 1.a to obtain 
accurate information about any deficiency balance on his old auto loan. He got “the 
runaround,” so he contacted a debt consolidation company. He was advised that his credit 
report showed only the initial loan balance of his defaulted car loan. At the referral of the 
debt consolidation company, in mid-October 2014, he retained the services of a law firm to 
verify his debts. (Tr. 35-36, 63-64, 79.) As of mid-November 2014, the law firm had asked 
the creditor in SOR 1.a to validate the debt as a “charge off,” and a collection agency to 
validate another of Applicant’s debts. The law firm asked the creditor holding Applicant’s 
current minivan loan about its credit entry reporting the loan as 30 days past due. The law 
firm also sent out challenges to the three credit reporting bureaus to verify some of the 
debts, including SOR 1.e (duplicated in SOR 1.f) and 1.g.
3
 (AE C.) Applicant recently was 
billed for the old car insurance debt in SOR 1.k. He had not contacted the creditor about 
payment as of November 2014. (Tr. 55.) 
 
 Applicant’s salary at work increased over the years, most recently in July 2014 to 
almost $93,000. (Tr. 27-28, 80.) His spouse is unemployed, although she plans to start 
working. (Tr. 59-60.) Applicant’s take-home income averages $2,400 to $2,500 every two 
weeks, depending on overtime. As a supervisor, he is entitled to overtime on those days 
that he works ten hours. (Tr. 57.) His monthly expenses include rent at $1,650; car 
payments totaling $1,060; natural gas and electricity around $200; cell phone costs around 
$250; cable and Internet fees of $150; about $800 for groceries; and unspecified 
commuting costs. He was paying $60 a month to the YMCA for his sons’ martial arts 
classes. (Tr. 57-60.) 
 
 Applicant and his spouse received a federal income tax refund of almost $12,000 for 
tax year 2013. (Tr. 61-62.) They bought bunk beds for their children and a sofa, and they 
paid some medical and other bills not in the SOR. (Tr. 63, 68-69.) Applicant also testified 
that he put money down for their current vehicles. The evidence shows that the car loans 
were opened in November 2012 and in September 2013 (GE 3), before he would have 
                                                 
3 
Two of the collection agencies listed on AE C do not appear on the credit reports in evidence. (GEs 3, 4.) 
 
 6 
filed his returns for tax year 2013, although he may well have used some of the tax refund 
for payments on his already established car loans.  
 
 Applicant and his spouse had both handled their household financial obligations 
until recently, when Applicant took them over to ensure that nothing is missed. (Tr. 69.) 
Applicant and his spouse had about a few hundred in their checking account as of mid-
November 2014. They had no savings. (Tr. 70.) Attempts to save by buying more efficient 
appliances and reducing energy costs have been unsuccessful, given the needs of his 
growing children. (Tr. 72.) Applicant intends to pay his legitimate debts and to be more 
diligent about setting a fixed budget to ensure that he lives within his means. (Tr. 81.) 
 
 Applicant is actively involved with his children. He coaches youth sports and is 
concession manager for a local youth football league. (Tr. 81-82.) 
 
 From the start of his employment with the defense contractor, Applicant has 
demonstrated skill and commitment to fulfilling his duties. (AEs A, B, D; Tr. 87-89.) As a 
new supervisor from December 2004 to March 2005, Applicant met his employer’s job 
requirements. His work output met and frequently exceeded job goals and objectives. One 
year later, he had demonstrated competency as a foreman to be rated overall as “Exceeds 
Job Requirements.” By March 2008, Applicant had become a “very valuable asset” to his 
department. He continued to demonstrate versatility “across the boat,” and he worked well 
with other departments. His performance evaluation for March 2010 to March 2011, when 
he was promoted from foreman to operations supervisor, shows that he spent most of the 
year on TDY in the Pacific Northwest on a project that was a great success for his 
employer. Applicant spent the majority of 2011 supporting activities at a shipyard in another 
state. Since March 2012, Applicant has excelled at his job requirements. His annual 
performance evaluation for March 2013 to March 2014 reflects that Applicant always gave 
“110% to ensure that the job gets done in a timely manner, usually meeting or exceeding 
schedule [and] always keeping quality at the top of his priority list.” He has one disciplinary 
infraction noted in his annual reviews. During the latest rating period, Applicant was 
suspended without pay for five days from work for attesting work as complete “without 
verifying OQE.”
4
 While his direct supervisor noted that such a situation was unacceptable 
in the department, he also noted that such situations could arise when an operations 
supervisor had such a significant workload. (AE D.) 
 
 Applicant’s department manager confirmed that Applicant took the lead of some of 
their most challenging projects. (Tr. 89-90.) He has known Applicant for the past ten years 
and considers Applicant trustworthy. He “absolutely” believes Applicant should retain his 
security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 90.) This manager became aware around October 2014 
that the issue of security concern involved “bill payment from sometime previous.” (Tr. 91.) 
He knows Applicant was suspended from work in late 2013 for making an error on 
paperwork, for which he accepted responsibility. (Tr. 92-93.) 
                                                 
4 
The acronym, OQE, is not defined in the record. Applicant’s department manager described the violation as 
signing off on documentation when the work was not 100% completed. Apparently, the five-day suspension is 
of a typical length for salaried employees of their company. (Tr. 93.) 
 
 7 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern about financial considerations is articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
 8 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant disclosed his auto loan default (SOR 1.a) on his e-QIP and indicated that 
the debt had been charged off for $17,160. A law firm is now attempting to verify the debt 
for him. He had no success contesting the $3,991 utility debt in SOR 1.b, which he asserts 
was incurred after he vacated the apartment, and the company failed to turn off the gas 
services. He disputes whatever portion of the $2,480 debt in SOR 1.c exceeds his usual 
monthly usage and early termination fee. He claims that he paid the $832 debt in SOR 1.d 
with his current wireless provider and the $572 credit card judgment in SOR 1.i when he 
received notice of the court action. He denies any knowledge of the telephone services 
debt in SOR 1.e (duplicated in SOR 1.f), the $73 cable debt in SOR 1.h, or the $174 
medical debt in SOR 1.j. He was just billed for the insurance debt in SOR 1.k, but he has 
not yet made any payments. (Tr. 55.) Applicant does not dispute that he incurred the $373 
debt for ambulance service, but he submits that it should have been paid by workmen’s 
compensation. Except for the $174 medical and $207 insurance debts, the delinquencies 
in the SOR were still on Applicant’s credit record as of April 2014.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
  
It is well settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that he is not responsible for the debt or 
that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(Internal citation omitted). For the most part, Applicant did not adequately rebut the credit 
report listing or submit documentation establishing AG ¶ 20(e): 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies only in that the debt in SOR 1.e is a duplicate listing by the collection 
agency of the original debt in SOR 1.f. Two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are 
established because of Applicant’s record of delinquent accounts: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
 9 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Concerning the mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current, reliability, or good judgment,” partially 
applies in that some of the debts in the SOR are not recent. Applicant defaulted on his auto 
loan (SOR 1.a) around early 2008. The telephone debt in SOR 1.e (duplicated in SOR 1.f) 
is also from 2008. Applicant testified that the natural gas debt in SOR 1.b was incurred 
after he vacated a previous residence. He has lived at his current address since March 
2009, so the utility debt was incurred some time ago. The ambulance debt in SOR 1.g is 
from April 2010. The financial judgment for a credit card delinquency was entered against 
him in June 2011. Even so, AG ¶ 20(a) does not fully mitigate the security concerns when 
the debts have not been resolved. 
 
Applicant incurred unexpected medical costs around $800 to $900 for his daughter’s 
birth in March 2013 and $1,500 in 2014 for his son’s dental care. The ambulance charge 
from 2010 was likewise not discretionary. However, for the most part, Applicant’s 
delinquencies were not shown to be the result of factors contemplated within AG ¶ 20(b): 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties began after he took on monthly car payments of $653 for 
the vehicle in SOR 1.a. He could not afford the payments without overtime earnings. He 
may not have foreseen the loss of overtime, but he exercised questionable financial 
judgment by counting on overtime to make his car payments. The evidence of subsequent 
Internet service and cell phone delinquencies suggests that Applicant has not always lived 
within his means. He had to borrow from his 401(k) to pay for a cruise to the Caribbean in 
2012. Applicant is currently paying $655 per month for a minivan bought in November 2012 
and $405 per month for a used truck bought in September 2013. His income tax refund of 
almost $12,000 went toward furniture and other bills not included in the SOR. Even 
assuming that he did not know about several of the debts before his March 2013 interview, 
he knew that he had defaulted on his auto loan in 2008, and that the creditor was reporting 
a charged-off balance of $17,160. He made no effort to verify a deficiency balance until 
after he received the SOR. TDY was a factor, but he was at home for most of 2013 and for 
some months in 2014. It is difficult to find that Applicant acted fully responsibly toward his 
creditors under these circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies only to the extent that Applicant 
had some unexpected expenses that compromised his ability to repay debt incurred 
because of poor financial decisions. 
 
When he was interviewed by the OPM investigator in March 2013, Applicant 
expressed his belief that his old car loan had been resolved through repossession and sale 
of his vehicle. He admitted that he was not certain whether he had any debt remaining on 
the loan. He expressed intent to investigate the debt and, if valid, to pay it off as soon as 
 
 10 
possible. When confronted about other delinquencies on his record, he indicated he would 
look into the credit card debt and the ambulance bill. As of November 2014, a law firm had 
requested validation from three creditors of Applicant’s balances, and verification from 
TransUnion and Equifax of four of their credit entries, and of Experian of three of its credit 
entries. Applicant testified that he paid the wireless phone debt in SOR 1.d and the credit 
card debt in SOR 1.i. However, he presented no evidence of debt satisfaction, despite the 
record being held open for two weeks after his security clearance hearing to prove they 
have been paid. His attempt to verify delinquent balances before paying on them is 
understandable. However, without some documented progress toward resolving them or 
proof they are not legitimate debts, neither AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control,” nor AG ¶ 20(d),” the individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
  
The financial analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Applicant has made significant contributions to his employer over the last ten years, 
for which he has been rewarded with increases in his annual salary from $52,000 to almost 
$93,000 presently. Even so, he appears to be living largely from paycheck to paycheck. His 
estimated recurring monthly expenses total $4,170 on net take-home pay of $4,800 to 
$5,000. At first blush, his income appears sufficient to meet his expenses and to make 
some payments toward his delinquencies. Yet, he did not include in his expenses the costs 
of commuting (e.g., gasoline, car insurance), or of many of the costs incurred raising his 
five children. His children’s needs (e.g., clothing, personal care, and medical/dental 
expenses) and activities (e.g., youth sports) have left him unable to save for emergencies.  
Applicant has no savings and only a couple hundred in his checking account. His almost 
$12,000 income tax refund for 2013 went for furniture for his sons but also for unpaid bills 
not in the SOR. 
 
 11 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases, stating: 
 
[A]n applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered 
in reaching a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan 
(and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at 
a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation marks 
omitted). As of November 2014, a law firm was attempting to verify the outstanding debt 
balances on Applicant’s credit record. While a credible first step, it is not a substitute for a 
record of payments. Had Applicant taken timely steps to address his debts, he would have had a 
stronger case in mitigation.  
 
 Applicant clearly needs his income to support his family and to make payments on his old 
and current debts. He indicated in March 2013 that he would investigate the past-due debts on 
his record and make payments when he could. At his hearing in November 2014, he 
acknowledged that he had made no payments and admitted that he should have been more 
proactive in addressing his debts. In closing, he guaranteed that his situation would be different 
going forward and that in the next few weeks, he would “do everything that’s within [his] means” 
to identify his debts, contact his creditors, and provide documentation. Applicant need not 
resolve or satisfy all of his delinquent debts for security clearance eligibility. Nevertheless, his 
failure to submit any documentation showing some contacts with his creditors raises doubts 
about Applicant’s commitment to resolving the issues of concern to the DOD.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990). Applicant may be 
a good candidate for a security clearance in the future should he be able to show that he 
has a plan to address his delinquent debts. Based on the record before me and the 
adjudicative guidelines that I am required to consider, I am unable to conclude that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility at this time. 
 
 
 12 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.h:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.i:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.j:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
