KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant cites to his having held a clearance while in the military and to other
evidence that, he believes, shows that he is worthy of a clearance.  Applicant’s argument is not
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence in the record or that
he mis-weighed the evidence.  There is no reason to believe that Applicant’s failure to have
responded to the FORM was due to inadequate notice of his right to submit evidence.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01567.a1
DATE: 04/10/2015
DATE: April 10, 2015
In Re:
--------------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01567
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
4, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On January 15, 2015, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether Applicant was denied due process; and whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under
Guideline F are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his current employer, a Federal contractor, since late 2013.  A high
school graduate, he served in the U.S. military from 1991 through 1993, receiving an honorable
discharge.  He has held a security clearance in the past.  In 2009, he used a company credit card for
personal expenses.  He was warned that this was not a proper use of the card, and the company
revoked it.  In 2013, however, his employer required him to apply for a new card, due to his
requirement for official travel.  Applicant made $8,000 in official travel-related expenditures.
However, he used the reimbursement to pay personal expenses rather than his travel card bill.  The
card-issuing company cancelled his card due to non-payment, and Applicant was fired from his job.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant of the Guideline F allegations.  However, he found that
Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from his misuse of the company travel card.  He
stated that Applicant’s misconduct was not minor and that it casts doubt on Applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to
evidence that Applicant had achieved financial stability.  However, he stated that Applicant’s
evidence was not enough to remove concerns about his repeated credit card misuse.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge’s findings of fact contain errors.  Some of the alleged
errors pertain to the Guideline F allegations that the Judge found in Applicant’s favor.  Concerning
Guideline E, Applicant argues that the revocation of his travel card was at his request rather than
having been the credit card company’s unilateral decision.  The Judge did not discuss or even cite
to the challenged finding in his analysis.  Even if it is erroneous it did not likely affect the outcome
of the case.  Therefore, it is harmless.  We conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security
concern are based upon “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record. “ Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
Applicant cites to his having held a clearance while in the military and to other evidence that,
he believes, shows that he is worthy of a clearance.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record or that he mis-weighed the
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-05359 at 3 (App. Bd. June 7, 2014).  Applicant contends that
the Judge failed properly to apply the whole-person concept.  He argues that his record as a whole
is favorable and that the Judge’s decision paid too much attention to the negative aspects of his
circumstances.  This argument, however, is merely a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  We conclude that the Judge’s whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of
the Directive, in that he evaluated Applicant’s security-significant conduct in light of that totality
of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01578 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2014).
Applicant’s appeal brief contains evidence from outside the record.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant argues that he could not “present any evidence not on the Statement of Reasons.”
Appeal Brief at 2.  The cover letter accompanying the SOR advised him that he “may provide
additional information that explains, refutes, extenuates, or mitigates the information set forth in the
[SOR].  Doing this may provide a basis for favorable resolution of your case without the need for
further proceedings.”  Letter, dated June 4, 2014.  The File of Relevant Material (FORM) provided
Applicant with notice of his right to submit “objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or
explanation, as appropriate.”  The cover letter accompanying the FORM advised Applicant of his
right to “submit any material” that he wanted the Judge to consider.  Letter, dated October 17, 2014.
Moreover, DOHA provided Applicant with a copy of the Directive, which sets forth an applicant’s
right to present documentary evidence in response to the FORM.  Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  There is no
reason to believe that Applicant’s failure to have responded to the FORM was due to inadequate
notice of his right to submit evidence.  Applicant was not denied the due process rights afforded by
the Directive.     
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
