 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP1 Case No. 14-03739 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant admitted owing 7 delinquent debts totaling $11,700 and provided no 
substantiated basis for denying the other 13 SOR-listed delinquencies that total $45,563 
per record credit reports. Applicant did not mitigate resulting trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On September 16, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
                                                          
1 The SOR and FORM mistakenly identified this as an ISCR security clearance case in the document 
headings. However, the SOR properly notified Applicant that the DoD CAF reviewed her eligibility to 
occupy a designated ADP I/II/III position, and was submitting the case to an administrative judge to make 
such a determination. DOHA Hearing Office administrative personnel and Department Counsel have 
since confirmed that Applicant is applying for a trustworthiness determination rather than a security 
clearance. The adjudicative criteria are the same for ISCR and ADP eligibility determinations. Accordingly 
the heading errors, and Department Counsel’s statements in the FORM concerning Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance or access to classified information instead of an ADP I/II/III public trust position, 
are harmless errors.    
 
2 
 
 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
On October 27, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.) On December 11, 
2014, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a 
complete copy of the FORM on December 15, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on 
January 6, 2015, and was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. She submitted no additional material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation during that time; made no objection to consideration of any contents of the 
FORM; and did not request additional time to respond. On March 12, 2015, DOHA 
assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling $57,263. In her response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the truth of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.j, 1.k, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r, 
and 1.t. She denied the remaining 13 allegations, with some explanations. (Item 3.) 
Applicant’s admissions, including those contained in her response to DoD 
interrogatories (Item 6), are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and divorced. She has a twelve-year-old son, and has 
cohabited with her son’s father since May 2002. She graduated from high school in 
1998, and attended college classes from September 2003 to May 2009 without 
completing a degree. She reported being employed in various part-time jobs from March 
2002 to July 2006, and November 2010 to July 2013, with unemployment to be a “Stay 
at home mom and student” during the intervening period. She obtained her current full-
time employment in November 2012. (Item 4; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies consist of student loans, medical bills, and 
other unpaid debts. They arose over the past 12 years, and she offered no evidence 
that would support a finding of either payments toward or a basis to dispute any of 
them. (Items 3 through 7.) 
 
 Applicant took out numerous student loans from 2003 to 2009 while she was 
attending college classes. The SOR alleges, and the record evidence confirms, that she 
owes $43,752 toward ten delinquent student loan accounts that have been placed for 
collection. Applicant said that she refuses to pay these debts because she is dissatisfied 
with the creditor’s failure to provide her with sufficient information about the debts. 
(Items 3 through 7.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted that she owes the five SOR-listed delinquent medical bills that 
were placed for collection and total $4,265. In her answer to the SOR she said, “part of 
the reason these accounts have continued to remain in collection is due to my current 
financial state, and an inability to pay rather than unwillingness. My finances are still 
extremely tight, and are currently tied up in supporting my family and staying on top of 
current bills and expenses. Attempting to pay them now would cause an undue financial 
hardship.” (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant also admitted owing $5,029 in state taxes for which a lien was filed 
against her in 2010, but gave no indication that she had either the means or intent to 
pay this debt. She denied owing the remaining four SOR-listed delinquent debts, 
totaling $1,811. Three of these date from 2003 and 2004. She claimed not to recognize 
them, but made no apparent effort to either research or dispute them. The fourth 
involved overdraft charges from a bank account. (Items 3 through 7.) 
 
 The record contains no information concerning Applicant’s current income and 
regular expenses, from which her ability to avoid incurring additional delinquent debt 
could be predicted. It also lacks evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character 
witnesses described her judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing.   
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
 
4 
 
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt over the past decade or more, 
much of which she incurred despite the fact that she could not afford to repay it. This 
evidence raises security concerns under both of these conditions, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts arose over many years, and more than $57,000 in 
delinquencies continue at present without any apparent means of resolution. She did 
not show that these debts arose from conditions beyond her control or that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, particularly concerning the medical bills. She has 
received no counseling to assist with debt resolution, nor did she demonstrate an ability 
to avoid recurrence of financial problems. All of the SOR-alleged debts remain 
unresolved, on the basis of record evidence, and no documented basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of any of them was provided. Applicant therefor failed to establish mitigation 
of trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to her financial difficulties. She has 
essentially ignored her voluntarily-incurred delinquent debts, and provided no evidence 
of efforts to resolve them despite her awareness of the resulting trustworthiness 
concerns. She failed to demonstrate good judgment or permanent behavioral change. 
Her ongoing delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress, and make continuation of financial problems likely.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a public trust position. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from her ongoing financial situation. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs   1.a through 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
