 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-02799 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On July 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 ((e-QIP), dated January 31, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 11, 2014. In a statement, notarized 
August 26, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on October 
17, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the 
Guidelines applicable to his case. There is a memorandum in the case file that indicates 
that Applicant received the FORM on March 3, 2015, but there is no signed receipt in 
the case file to confirm that date. Applicant did speak with a representative of the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on March 3, 2015, during which the 
receipt was discussed. According to the memorandum, a response was due on April 2, 
2015. On April 3, 2015, he submitted four character references, to which Department 
Counsel did not object, and I marked them as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE D. 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015. As of the date of this decision, no 
additional response has been received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.u.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an information technology engineer with his current employer since February 
2011.3 He was previously unemployed for several substantial periods: February 2005 – 
April 2005; September 2005 – January 2006; April 2007 – September 2007; February 
2008 – December 2008; June 2009 – August 2009; and November 2010 – February 
2011.4 He is a February 2001 high school graduate.5 One month after his high school 
graduation, Applicant enlisted in the state Army National Guard (ANG), and he 
remained with the ANG until August 2008, when he was issued an honorable 
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 26, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13-15, 19-22. 
 
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
discharge.6 He is currently in the process of attempting to reenlist in the ANG.7 While he 
was in the ANG, Applicant was deployed to Iraq from January 2004 until January 2005.8 
He also was deployed as a federal contractor to Afghanistan from August 2009 until 
November 2010.9 He was granted a secret security clearance to coincide with his 
membership in the ANG.10 Applicant was married in February 2008.11 He has one son, 
born in 2007.12 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 It is unclear when or why Applicant’s finances became so unmanageable that he 
was unable to maintain his monthly payments, resulting in some of his accounts 
becoming delinquent and placed for collection as early as 2010. The SOR identified 21 
purportedly continuing delinquent debts totaling approximately $23,396 that had been 
placed for collection, as reflected by a January 2013 credit report,13 and a March 2014 
credit report.14 Of the 21 accounts listed, 7 are delinquent medical accounts, and at 
least 4 are delinquent student loans.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated:15 
 
Most of the things listed on my Statement of Reasons are things that were 
placed on my credit before I ever had a real understanding of credit and 
how it may affect my life. I have a lot of medical bills from when I was 
young and had no insurance, as well as student loans that were used 
while attempting to go to school. I had to drop out because, due to 
unknown reasons at that time, my wife began to lose her vision and I 
dropped out to take care of her. . . . 
 
I have made mistakes in my life, procrastination being chief among them. 
Add to the naïve nature in which I treated credit, and you can see how 
things have gotten to the shape they are in. I am not a bad person who 
lives a lavish lifestyle without regard of cost. I am a family man who loves 
my family and my country, and want to continue to support both. 
                                                          
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 25. 
 
7
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 26, 2014), at 4. 
 
8
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
9
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
10
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 41-42. 
 
11
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 27-28. 
 
12
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
13
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated February 6, 2013). 
 
14
 Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 5, 2014). 
 
15
 Item 4, supra note 7, at 4. 
 
4 
                                      
 
When he completed his e-QIP in January 2013, Applicant stated that he would 
contact various creditors listed in his credit report to make payment arrangements.16 He 
offered no evidence to confirm that he ever did so. In August 2014, Applicant indicated 
that he had been offered an unspecified settlement of the delinquent apartment lease 
account for $334 (SOR ¶ 1.c.), and he would pay it within two weeks.17 Despite the 
passage of over seven months, Applicant failed to submit any documentation to indicate 
that the account had been resolved. He admitted that he had made no payments on any 
of the remaining accounts listed in the SOR. There is no evidence to indicate that 
Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his monthly 
household or debt expenses, or whether or not he has any funds remaining at the end 
of each month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant offered no evidence to 
indicate that his financial problems are now under control. He did, however, indicate that 
if he successfully reenlists in the ANG, he would receive an unspecified enlistment 
bonus which he contends would be applied to “a large part of the debt at once.”18 He 
added that since he recently paid off his wife’s car, the former payments and his ANG 
income would enable him to pay other bills.19 Once again, he failed to submit any 
documentation to address his reenlistment status, the quantity of his anticipated bonus, 
or the payoff statement for his wife’s car.  
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s middle school teacher, who is now the high school assistant principal, 
is highly supportive of Applicant’s application. He noted Applicant’s high character and 
integrity, even in times of difficulty, and frequently refers to Applicant as a person who 
has moved above the situation in which he was raised and managed to succeed.20 A 
major in the ANG has known Applicant since they were in high school. They served 
together in Iraq and again in Afghanistan when he was still in the ANG and Applicant 
was a defense contractor. He characterized Applicant as a man of character and 
integrity, and said he can be trusted.21 Another former ANG colleague served with 
Applicant in Iraq, and he believes that Applicant has an outstanding work ethic, and is 
trustworthy and goal oriented.22 A current work colleague cited Applicant’s attention to 
detail, trustworthiness, loyalty, and determination.23 
                                                          
16
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 44-54. 
 
17
 Item 4, supra note 7, at 4. 
 
18
 Item 4, supra note 7, at 4. 
 
19
 Item 4, supra note 7, at 4. 
 
20
 AE  A (Character Reference, dated March 31, 2015). 
 
21
 AE B (Character Reference, dated April 1, 2015). 
 
22
 AE C (Character Reference, dated April 2, 2015). 
 
23 AE D (Character Reference, dated March 30, 2015). 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”24 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”26 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.27  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
24
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
25
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
26
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
27
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”28 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”29 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances, which 
started as early as 2010. The SOR identified 21 purportedly continuing delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $23,396 that had been placed for collection. He found himself 
with insufficient funds to continue making his routine monthly payments and various 
                                                          
28
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
29
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
accounts became delinquent, and were placed for collection.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”30  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. The 
nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 
2010 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
Applicant was previously unemployed for several substantial periods, but the most 
recent period came sometime after his initial financial problems, and Applicant attributed 
his major financial problems to health issues regarding his wife and his own unspecified 
health issues “when he was young” that arose when he had no health insurance. He 
offered no evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of his debts and essentially 
ignored them.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any 
funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has 
not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, 
                                                          
30
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
if any, efforts of working with his creditors.31 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.32 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.33   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He had a good 
record with the ANG. He was deployed to Iraq as a member of the ANG and to 
Afghanistan as a defense contractor. Over the years, he had been unemployed for 
extensive periods. He is well thought of among his friends and colleagues, and appears 
to be a caring husband. He has declared his intention of cleaning up his credit and 
maintaining a good credit history.  
  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s long-standing failure to repay creditors between 2010 and the present, or to 
arrange payment plans, even for the smallest of his delinquent accounts, reflects traits 
which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. It is not known what 
                                                          
31
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
32
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
33
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any funds remaining at the end of 
each month for discretionary use or savings. Thus, there are no indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has simply made the 
assertions that his delinquent accounts would be resolved. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Considering the relative absence of confirmed debt resolution and 
elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:34 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.’ However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has ‘. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.’) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his debts.  Overall, the evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.u.:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
34
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
