1
                                                             
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04101
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 24, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP), on February 12, 2014. (Government Exhibit 1.)  On September 29,
2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) concerning Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 28, 2014 (Answer), and
requested a decision without a hearing. He subsequently requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 12,
2015. This case was assigned to me on January 21, 2015. The Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 22, 2015. I
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 26, 2015. The Government offered
Government Exhibits 1, and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf, called one additional witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A
2
through D, also without objection. Applicant requested that the record remain open for
receipt of additional documentation. Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit E on March
10, 2015, and it was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on March 3, 2015. The record closed on March 10, 2015. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 29 and single. He has a bachelor of arts degree. He is employed by
a defense contractor, and seeks to retain a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has used marijuana, and that he used it while holding a security
clearance. Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR, and submitted additional
information supporting his request for a security clearance.
Applicant attended college from 2003 through 2007. Applicant admits using
marijuana about three or four times during his college years. He admitted that use on
his first e-QIP, which he filled out on October 10, 2008. He received a security
clearance about that time. (Government Exhibit 2; Tr. 33-35.)
In about 2012 Applicant was at a party with some friends from college. A
marijuana cigarette was passed around and Applicant had some. He regretted using it
the next day, admitting, “it didn’t necessarily cross my mind that I was violating my
employment or my agreement with the Department of Defense. It should have.”
Applicant no longer associates with those people. He admitted this one additional use
on his second e-QIP, which he completed in February 2014. (Government Exhibit 1; Tr.
35-37, 40-41.)
Applicant has not used marijuana since about 2012 and has repeatedly stated
that he will not use marijuana again. In addition, he submitted a signed statement of
intent not to use illegal drugs in the future, with his understanding that a violation shall
result in automatic revocation of his security clearance. (Answer; Applicant Exhibit D; Tr.
38, 41, 47-48.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted documentation showing that he is a highly respected
employee. Applicant Exhibits A through C are his Performance Reviews for the 2011,
2012, and 2013 calendar years. His overall summary was as a top performer, who
either “Far Exceeds Expectations,” or “Consistently Exceeds Expectations.” (Tr. 42-43.) 
3
A coworker of Applicant’s testified. He has known Applicant since 2008, has been
in the defense industry since 1982, and has a Top Secret clearance. He considers
Applicant to be a person of “very high character, trustworthy, reputable.” He trusts
Applicant “completely with the level of security we have at our job.” The witness
recommended Applicant for a position of trust. (Tr. 19-30.)
Applicant is also going to graduate school at the same time he is working full
time. He submitted a transcript showing that he is in good standing at school, with a
cumulative 3.91 GPA. (Applicant Exhibit D; Tr. 45-46.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
4
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
5
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant used marijuana less than five times when at college between 2003 and
2007. He had a relapse and used marijuana once in 2012, after receiving a security
clearance. Both of the disqualifying conditions have application to Applicant’s case.
Applicant has, however, overcome the Government’s case. His use was
infrequent, the vast majority happened several years ago, and it is very unlikely to recur.
He has always been truthful with DoD about his use, and credibly states that he will not
use marijuana in the future. He no longer associates with his friends from college, and
submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any
violation. Guideline H is found for Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline H, above, applies here as well. As stated, Applicant used marijuana a handful
of times, most of it when he was in college in his early 20s. He has matured, and his
testimony, that of his witness, and his evidence shows a talented and able person who
is more than willing to abide by security rules. Based on the record, I find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I find that
there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8));
and that there is a low likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
6
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug
involvement. Accordingly, the evidence supports granting his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
