 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03200 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. He mitigated the concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 2, 2014. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 18, 2015, with a hearing date of March 4, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Government produced a letter dated January 26, 2015, 
informing Applicant of the exhibits it intended to offer at the hearing. This document was 
marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Its exhibit list was marked as a HE II and its request to 
take administrative notice of certain facts about the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) 
was marked as HE III. Applicant testified and one offered exhibit (AE) A, which was an 
incomplete document. The record was held open after the hearing and Applicant 
produced a completed document which was substituted for AE A. It was admitted 
without an objection. No other post-hearing documents were produced. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2015.  
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the PRC. Applicant did not object and the request was 
approved. The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence 
but were included in the record as HE III. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations. However, 
regarding all the Guideline B allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a though 1.d), he explained that he 
divorced his wife (a citizen of the PRC) and therefore was no longer related to his wife, 
her father, mother, and brother who are all citizens and residents of the PRC. He also 
admitted using marijuana while holding a security clearance (SOR ¶ 2.a). Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is a U.S. citizen by birth. He served in the USMC. 
from 2000 to 2004, at which time he received an honorable discharge as a sergeant, 
pay grade E-5. He then began working as a federal contractor employee from 2005 
through the present. From 2005 through 2012, he worked for a federal contractor in 
Japan. While working in Japan, he met N.M. who was a citizen of the PRC attending 
school in Japan. They began dating in 2004. After they dated for some time, Applicant 
inquired with his security manager about whether there were any security concerns if he 
would marry N.M. On his own, he also researched the question by reviewing the 
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM). After receiving 
assurances from his security manager that there was not a problem, Applicant married 
 
3 
 
 
N.M. in August 2007. In October 2007, they went to the PRC to celebrate their 
wedding.1   
 
 Applicant and his wife had a child born in November 2009. In 2012, Applicant’s 
family moved from Japan to their current location in the United States. According to 
Applicant, sometime after his son was born, the marriage began to break down. They 
separated in July 2013 and formally divorced in April 2014. Under the terms of the 
divorce decree, Applicant and N.M. are to share joint custody of their son. N.M. returned 
to the PRC, taking their son, in May 2014 and remains there as of the date of this 
hearing. Applicant gave her verbal permission to leave the country with their son, but he 
believed she would bring him back to the United States after a short visit. By remaining 
in the PRC with their son, N.M. is in violation of the divorce decree. In an attempt to 
bring his son back to the United States, Applicant visited the PRC in October 2014 and 
hired an international law firm to attempt to negotiate the return of his son. This attempt 
was unsuccessful. Applicant’s son is solely a U.S. citizen and not a joint citizen with the 
PRC. His son’s original 60-day entry visa has expired; therefore, his legal status in the 
PRC is unknown. He has weekly contact with his son and ex-wife over the internet. His 
ex-wife has permanent residency status in the United States that expires in May 2015. 
Applicant is hoping she returns before then. If she does return, he plans on returning to 
court to seek full custody of his son through a modification of the divorce decree.2   
 
 When Applicant was married to N.M., he had limited contact with his father-in 
law, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law. They did not speak English and he did not speak 
Chinese. They do not have any PRC government affiliation. He visited the PRC in 2008 
for his brother-in-laws wedding. Since the divorce from his wife, he does not have 
contact with his former in-laws. He did see them when he was in the PRC in October 
2014 trying to regain custody of his son.3 
 
 Applicant used marijuana when he was on vacation with a friend on two 
occasions, once in 2007, and once in 2008. A friend offered him the marijuana and he 
was curious and tried it on these occasions. He has not used marijuana since that time 
and does not intend to do so in the future. He acknowledged that he held a security 
clearance at the time of those uses and that he exercised poor judgment. He admitted 
the uses on his security clearance application and background interview without trying 
to hide this information. Many things have changed in his life since he last used 
marijuana. He is more responsible now and will not jeopardize his future by using 
marijuana again.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 27-28, 36; GE 1-2. 
 
2 Tr. at 28, 38-42, 46-47, 49-50, 53, 56; GE 1; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 29, 36-37, 60; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-36; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
People’s Republic of China   
 
 The PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party. The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses 
political dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced 
confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. Repression and coercion, 
particularly against organizations and individuals involved in rights advocacy and public 
interest issues, are routine.   
 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive countries in targeting sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology, and economic intelligence. It has targeted the U.S. with 
active intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. In China, authorities have 
monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, 
and internet communications. Authorities opened and censored mail. The security 
services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to 
computers, telephones, and fax machines. All major hotels had a sizable internal 
security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and searched for 
sensitive or proprietary materials.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
5 HE III. 
 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s ex-wife is a citizen of the PRC. She took the couples’ son to the PRC 
one month after they divorced and remains there in violation of a divorce decree. 
Applicant has initiated efforts to regain custody of his son, but so far has been 
unsuccessful. He remains in contact with his ex-wife and son through weekly internet 
communications. When he was married to his ex-wife he had very limited contact with 
his in-laws. Now that they are divorced he has no contact with them. China is a 
communist country with a poor human rights record. It is one of the world’s most 
aggressive nations in the collection of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information. While Applicant’s ex-wife retains custody of the couples’ son in the PRC, 
there exists a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. The same situation also creates a potential conflict of interest 
for Applicant. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence. Applicant has no 
further connection to his ex-in-laws thus alleviating any heightened risk or potential 
conflict of interest. SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d are resolved in Applicant’s favor.    
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant is clearly a loyal U.S. citizen with no allegiance to the PRC. However, 
he is in a difficult position because his ex-wife has taken their son to the PRC, in 
violation of their divorce decree, and refuses to return. There is very little in the world 
that is stronger than a parents desire to care for his child. This works against Applicant 
in this case because it possibly places him in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of his ex-wife over those of the United States. Although Applicant has 
 
7 
 
 
longstanding ties to the United States and has fully met his reporting requirements 
concerning his foreign contacts, his wife has almost no ties to this country and refuses 
to return Applicant’s son to the United States. As stated above, the protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration and any doubt must be resolved in 
favor of national security. Doubts remain about Applicant’s ex-wife because she could 
use the custody issue as leverage against Applicant. Because of Applicant’s continuing 
ties to his ex-wife and the nature of the government of China, I am unable to find either 
of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable to SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 8(b) partially 
applies because of Applicant’s long-standing loyalties in the United States. Despite the 
presence of some mitigation, it is insufficient to overcome the significant security 
concerns generated by Applicant’s ex-wife and possibility that she uses the custody 
disagreement against Applicant.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant admitted two uses of marijuana while holding a security clearance in 
2007 and 2008. The record contains sufficient evidence to support application of AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and (e) in this case.  
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since 2008 and committed to not using it in the 
future. He fully admitted his uses in his security clearance application and his clearance 
interview. His life has changed since his last use and he is more responsible. Applicant 
mitigated the uses of marijuana. AG ¶¶ 17(c) – 17(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant’s ex-wife is a citizen of and resides in the PRC and has possession of 
the couples’ son in violation of their divorce decree. Applicant has visited the PRC in an 
 
9 
 
 
attempt to gain custody of his son. The PRC has an authoritarian government, a bad 
human rights record, and has a very aggressive espionage program aimed at the United 
States. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. There is no reason 
to question Applicant’s loyalty and devotion to this country. However, he has not 
overcome the vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, and duress created by his 
ex-wife and the custody issue related to his son.  
 
 Applicant has done nothing whatsoever to question his loyalty and devotion to 
this country. However, he has simply been unable to overcome the heavy burden of 
showing that he and his ex-wife in the PRC are not subject to influence by that country. 
His vulnerability to foreign pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress remains a 
concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. He did 
mitigate the personal conduct concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
