1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-06180
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On March 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
In his October 7, 2009, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted one of the two
allegations raised under Guideline E and all four allegations raised under Guideline B.
He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to
another administrative judge on June 6, 2011, but it was transferred to me on July 5,
2011, for caseload considerations. The parties agreed to an August 8, 2011, hearing
date. A notice to that effect was issued by DOHA on July 19, 2011. Due to a scheduling
conflict, an amended notice was issued on July 20, 2011, scheduling the hearing for
August 10, 2011. The hearing took place as scheduled. 
 Tr. 19-20. Allegation ¶ 2.a was amended to read: “You have two sisters and a brother who are citizens and1
residents of Lebanon.”
 Ex. HE (Administrative Notice) at 1.2
 Id. at 2, citing to HE attachments U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State3
Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, dated Aug. 5, 2010, at 3, and U.S. Department of State, Country Reports
on Terrorism, Chapter 6 - Terrorist Organizations (Terrorist Organizations), dated Aug. 5, 2010, at 2 and 12.
 Terrorist Organizations, supra, note 3.4
2
 
Department Counsel submitted four documents and information constituting a
request for administrative notice concerning the country at issue (Lebanon). The
materials were accepted into the record as exhibits (Ex.) 1-4 and administrative notice
hearing exhibit (HE1 or HE) without objection. Applicant gave testimony, introduced one
witness, and offered 16 documents, which were accepted into the record without
objection as Exs. A-P. Applicant was given until August 23, 2011, to submit any
additional documents through Department Counsel. With the agreement of the parties,
allegation ¶ 2.d was struck due to a change in facts regarding Applicant’s brother.
Reference to that brother was incorporated into an amended allegation ¶ 2.a.  On1
August 17, 2011, the transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received. Also on that date,
Applicant forwarded one additional document to Department Counsel. After it was
forwarded to me, the document was accepted into the record without objection on
September 1, 2011, as Ex. Q. The record was then closed. Based upon a review of the
record, security clearance is denied.
Administrative Notice
The Government’s HE consists of a summary of facts about the Republic of
Lebanon and references 18 U.S. government official documents. Based on those
materials, I take notice of the following: The Republic of Lebanon became independent
in 1943. Since that time, its history “has been marked by periods of political turmoil
interspersed with prosperity.”  Although it is a parliamentary democracy, the effective2
exercise of political rights was precluded during a civil war that raged from 1970s until
1992. Post-war reconstruction through 2005 was marked by political instability,
economic uncertainty, assassination plots involving Lebanese officials, and clashes
between Israeli military forces and Hizballah, a Shia Islamist political organization which
has been designated by the United States as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization” and is
described as “the most technically capable terrorist group in the world.”  Hizballah is3
provided political and material support by Syria, a country designated by the United
States as a state sponsor of terrorism and has significant intelligence assets in
Lebanon. 
The Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance group
and political party.  Hizballah is closely allied with Iran. It  provides support to several4
Palestinian terrorist organizations, and is known to have been involved in numerous anti
 Ex. HE, supra, note 2, at 3.5
 Ex. HE, U.S. Department of State, Recent Developments in Lebanon (Recent Developments), dated Mar.6
24, 2009, at 2.
 Ex. HE, Remarks on Lebanon and Resolution 1559 at 1.7
 Ex. HE, supra, note 2, at 4.8
 Id. at 5, citing to U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Former Employee of CIA and FBI Pleads Guilty, dated Nov. 13, 2007.9
 Id., citing to U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Man Pleads Guilty to Providing Material Support to Hizballah TV Station,10
Dec. 30, 2008.
 Applicant had previously visited the United States for two months as a high school student. Tr. 82.11
3
 
U.S. and anti- Israeli terrorist attacks.  The United States is concerned about the role5
played by Hizballah in the Lebanese government, noting that it “clearly remains a
danger to Lebanon and the region.”  In May 2009, the U.S. Permanent Representative6
in the United Nations condemned Hizballah’s “unwarranted interference in the domestic
affairs of a sovereign state.”  7
Human rights violations exist within Lebanon. Its security forces have been
known to arbitrarily arrest and detain individuals. Detainees have experienced torture
and abuse. Lebanese authorities frequently interfere with the privacy of persons
regarded as enemies of the government. Americans living and working in Lebanon
should understand that they accept risks in remaining. The United States remains
concerned about the potential for violence with little or no warning.  Dual U.S.-Lebanese
citizens may be subject to laws that impose special obligations on them.8
The threat of intelligence gathering by Hizballah and its agents remains a
concern. Such activities have extended beyond Lebanon’s borders. In 2007, for
example, a Lebanese national and U.S. citizen pled guilty to charges of fraudulently
obtaining U.S. citizenship. She later used that citizenship to gain employment at the FBI
and CIA; accessing a federal computer system to unlawfully query information about
her relatives and the terrorist organization Hizballah; and conspiring to defraud the
United States.  Moreover, in 2008, a New Jersey man pled guilty to providing material9
support to Hizballah by knowingly providing satellite transmission services to Al Manar.
The man admitted that he knew Al Manar was operated by Hizballah and that Hizballah
had engaged in acts of terrorism as defined by federal law.  10
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old translator/linguist who has worked for various defense
contractors since 2003. The eldest child of Lebanese parents, he was born in Kuwait.
He graduated from a Kuwaiti high school in 1981. In 1987, he came to the United
States to pursue post-secondary studies and learn the English language.  Applicant11
 Tr. 166. It is unclear which security application served as the basis for this previous SOR. The evidence12
reflects that previous applications were completed and dated in January 2003, September 2003, January
2004, August 2004, October 2004, and December 2004. See Ex. 3 (AJ Dec. ISCR Case No. 04-08867, dated
May 31, 2006) at 4. See also Ex. D (Applicant’s SF86, dated Dec. 9, 2004). The application forming the basis
of the SOR at issue in this case, dated March 2011, would be at least Applicant’s sixth effort.
 Tr. 142-145.13
 Ex. 3, supra, note 12. The allegations under Guideline B were substantially the same as those raised in the14
current proceeding, with this proceeding adding consideration of a Lebanese friend, as noted below. The
Guideline E allegations appear to have been based on issues concerning answers given regarding a foreign
passport and foreign travel and the judgment those answers reflected, not the Guideline E issues presented
in this case. Given the changes in Lebanon over the years in relation to Applicant’s foreign contacts, the new
personal conduct issues, and the implementation of revised adjudicative guidelines that became effective in
September 2006,  the earlier decision’s findings are not binding herein.
4
 
married in 1989 and relocated to a different part of the United States to continue his
studies. Applicant’s parents joined him the United States in the early 1990s. Applicant
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1995. He divorced in 1998. Applicant’s father died
in 2001, while seeking U.S. citizenship. His mother became a U.S. citizen in 2003. 
Applicant never completed his college program. He worked his way up from
humble jobs to becoming a trucking service owner/operator from 1999 until 2002. He
then turned to linguistics. As a linguist, he has been deployed overseas four times to
serve in his professional capacity. During one mission, Applicant was severely injured.
His first job was with Company X, where he worked from about October 2002 until
August 2003. During that time, he was granted an interim clearance. When he
resigned, he was eligible for rehire. He worked for another entity from October 2003
until April 2004, then provided periodic service for yet another entity from September
2004 through December 2004. From December 2004 until August 2006, he worked for
a subsidiary or subcontractor under the umbrella of Company X. 
After multiple subject interviews, a SOR was issued regarding Applicant’s
application for a security clearance that noted security concerns arising under Guideline
B, Guideline C, and Guideline E.  Applicant requested a hearing before a DOHA12
administrative judge. A hearing was convened, at which Applicant appeared with the aid
of counsel.  In May 2006, the administrative judge issued a decision in which Guideline13
B and Guideline C were found in favor of Applicant, but Guideline E was found against
him.  With regard to the adverse findings, the administrative judge found that at least14
one explanation provided by Applicant “makes little sense,” that his omission of certain
information during the investigatory process reflected “poor judgment,” and that while
the record did not support a finding that Applicant’s answers to another question lacked
evidence that the omission was deliberate, there was evidence of “questionable
 Id. at 8-9. The administrative judge concluded his decision by noting, “An applicant is duty bound to be15
forthright during all phases of the security investigation.”
 Ex. 4 (App. Bd. Dec. ISCR Case No. 04-08867, dated Feb. 20, 2007).16
 Ex. Q (Supplemental submission, dated Aug. 17, 2011). The exact date of the denial varies. The SOR and17
some sources date the denial as May 31, 2006, the date of the administrative judge’s adverse decision. A May
15, 2008, letter from the Defense Security Service states that Applicant’s security eligibility was denied on
June 8, 2006. Ex. G (DISCO letter, dated May 15, 2008).
 Ex. 1 (e-QIP, dated Sep. 9, 2009) at 42-43 of 51.18
 Ex. C (Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview, dated Oct. 26, 2009). 19
5
 
judgment.”  The DOHA Appeal Board affirmed the administrative judge’s decision.  As15 16
a result, Applicant was terminated from his job when his application for a security
clearance was denied.   17
Unemployed from August 2006 until April 2008, Applicant was then hired by his
present employer as a linguist. On September 9, 2009, Applicant certified as true his
answers to a security clearance application (e-QIP). In response to Section 25(b)(1) (To
your knowledge, have you EVER had a clearance or access authorization denied,
suspended, or revoked; or been debarred from government employment? If “Yes,” give
the action(s), date(s) of action(s), agency(ies), and circumstances. Note: An
administrative downgrade or termination of a security clearance is not a revocation),
Applicant answered “Yes.” In the space provided, he noted, “Date of action,
month/year: 06/2006" and wrote “A misunderstanding of the the [sic] question that
resulted in denial. It was not my fault as I was directed by [Company X] FSO to do so.”18
No further comments clarified this statement. 
A lengthy personal subject interview was conducted under unsworn declaration
on October 26, 2009. The investigator reported Applicant’s comments as follows: 
Subject answered the question about having a clearance or access
authorization denied, suspended or revoked incorrectly. Subject
should have answered the question no (discrepant) because the
subject left [Company X] voluntarily in August 2003[.] The subject
believes his clearance was terminated because the subject was no
longer going to be working for [Company X]. The subject is not
aware of ever having a clearance denied, suspended or revoked or
being debarred from government employment[.] The subject would
have had his clearance terminated when he left [Company X].  19
In an interrogatory signed on August 23, 2010, Applicant was asked at Item 32
(Personal Conduct), “You failed to list your prior clearance denial on your current
security clearance application. Please indicate the reasons you failed to list your denial.
 Ex. 2 (Interrogatory, dated Aug. 23, 2010) at 21.20
 Id.21
 Tr. 149-151; Id. at 23. In his response to the SOR, however, Applicant denied that he was “provided with22
an opportunity to review or comment upon what” the investigator wrote in the summary. See SOR response,
dated Apr. 28, 2011, at 2. Applicant later characterized the interviewer’s underlying summary as “very
ambiguous.” Tr. 166.
 Id.23
 Tr. 99.24
 Ex. 3, supra, note 12, at 7. To Applicant’s distress, his two sisters in Lebanon do not regularly visit,25
communicate, or maintain contact. He explained that in their culture, it is incumbent upon the younger siblings
to make such efforts as a gesture of respect to the eldest sibling. Tr. 99-102. 
6
 
Fully explain.”  Applicant responded by writing: “I did not fail to list my prior clearance20
denial on my current security clearance application. I listed the denial on SF86 Section
25, 1B, p. 43.”  In swearing or affirming his answers, he also swore or affirmed that he21
had read the summary of the October 26, 2009, interview and “either found the
interview report to be accurate” or added corrected information in the space provided.22
Later, in responding to the SOR, he stated that he had not been provided with an
opportunity to review the investigator’s summary.  23
As noted, Applicant is the first-born child in his family. The second-born child in
Applicant’s family is a sister, who was born in Kuwait but is a citizen by birth of
Lebanon. A widowed homemaker, she is presently a resident and citizen of Lebanon
with four children. She does not maintain much contact with Applicant, a fact that hurts
him personally.  The third-born child is a sister who was born in Kuwait who similarly24
has maintained Lebanese citizenship since birth. She resides in Lebanon. She is a
housewife who contacts Applicant on holidays, but seldom at other times.  Her25
husband is an officer in the Lebanese Army. Applicant last saw this sister and her
husband after Applicant’s father died in early 2001. The fourth-born child in Applicant’s
family is also a sister, who was born in Kuwait as a Lebanese citizen. She is now a U.S.
citizen who is married to a U.S. citizen. They have children who are U.S. citizens. 
Applicant’s youngest sibling is a brother, who was also born in Kuwait as a
Lebanese citizen. The brother was preparing to seek U.S. citizenship when he was
involved in a vehicular accident that resulted in an individual’s death. He was
imprisoned in the United States as a result of the death. He was deported to Lebanon in
2010 after he completed his period of incarceration. The brother remains a resident and
citizen of Lebanon. His wife is a U.S. born citizen who lives in the United States with
 Tr. 104.26
 Tr. 101-104. Applicant described their relationship as “not good.” Tr. 101.27
 The friend with whom Applicant once shared a teenage friendship now lives in Kuwait. Tr. 92. His residence28
was erroneously referenced as Lebanon at least once during the hearing. Tr. 71.
 Tr. 92.29
 Tr. 93-94. 30
 Tr. 97.31
 Tr. 72-75.32
7
 
their child.  Applicant’s relationship with his brother has long been strained. The26
brother did not and does not respect his advice and familial authority.  27
Applicant also has an acquaintance who resides in Kuwait, but who is a citizen of
Lebanon.  Applicant has referred to this male individual, whom he has known since28
high school, as a “friend.” They were in school together and, along with the boy’s
brother,  played soccer together after high school. Applicant does not know much about
these peers’ family.  The acquaintance’s brother, however, is now a resident and29
citizen of the United States who maintains a security clearance.  Applicant and the30
friend’s brother were roommates for a while when Applicant attended a U.S. college.
The friend, however, has never visited the United States. Over the years, Applicant has
complained to his former roommate that the brother in Kuwait does not keep contact
with Applicant. This led to a telephone conversation in early 2011 with the former friend.
Distance and years had increasingly affected their childhood friendship since Applicant
moved to the United States.  Applicant now considers this man to be a mere31
acquaintance. A current close friend of Applicant’s conveyed his impression that
Applicant’s childhood friend is now better termed an acquaintance with whom he once
shared a past, but who is not a present friend.    32
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).33
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).34
 Id.35
 Id.36
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.37
8
 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and are considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a33
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  34
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access35
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily36
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the37
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance. Based upon consideration of the evidence, I
 AG ¶ 15.38
 Id.39
9
 
find Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) to be pertinent
to the case. Conditions pertaining to these guidelines that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because “conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.“  In addition, “any failure to38
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process” is of special interest.  39
In May 2006, a DOHA administrative judge issued an adverse decision regarding
Applicant that denied him a security clearance. The Defense Security Service (DSS)
noted the effective date of that denial as June 8, 2006. Consequently, Applicant lost his
job with a subsidiary or subcontractor of Company X in August 2006. In an October 26,
2009, interview, Applicant claimed that he was not aware of ever having had a security
clearance denied, but only terminated (when he left a job with Company X in 2003). If
this explanation was intentionally false or misleading, it would be sufficient to raise
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16 (a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). With a PC DC
potentially raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns.
Applicant’s statements or representations of his statements regarding his past
security clearance status consist of the following:
! May 2006 – After an SOR was issued and a hearing was held, a DOHA
administrative judge issued a decision denying Applicant a security clearance. That
decision was affirmed by the DOHA Appeal Board in February 2007.
! May 2008 – DSS DISCO letter is issued to Applicant, referencing his 2006
security clearance denial.
 SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.b.40
 Tr. 129-130. Applicant did not elaborate as to any other clearances.41
 Tr. 132.42
 Tr. 146-14843
10
 
! September 2009 – Applicant completed a security clearance application in
which he noted a 2006 clearance denial that he described as having been based on the
misunderstanding of a question.
! October 2009 – After discussing his past employment, including the time
during which Applicant first worked for Company X, Applicant gave a statement that led
an investigator to note: “The subject is not aware of ever having a clearance denied,
suspended or revoked or being debarred from government employment.” This
statement is not qualified in any manner.
! August 2010 – Applicant referenced his September 2009 security clearance
application answer regarding a past clearance denial, but also adopted the October
2009 investigator’s summary without correction, qualification, or comment.
! 2011 – The current SOR alleges that Applicant’s comments to the investigator
were deliberately false or misleading when he claimed that he had never had a
clearance denied, but only terminated when he left his employment with Company X.
Rather, it notes that his prior security clearance application was denied as a result of
the adverse May 2006 DOHA administrative judge’s decision.  In response, Applicant40
implied that he was previously denied the opportunity to review or comment on the
interviewer’s summary. No reference is made to his adoption of that summary in 2010.
He wrote that the attributed comment was based on a misunderstanding.
Applicant’s testimony at the hearing did not resolve the inconsistencies
presented by the facts. He initially disclosed the 2006 denial in his September 2009
application, then, during the October 2009 interview, made the sweeping statement that
he was not aware of ever having had a clearance denied, suspended, or revoked. By
way of explanation, he testified that there was confusion about his periods of
employment with Company X and its subsidiary/subcontractor, and the various forms of
clearances he has maintained.  He asserted that the discrepancy is based on41
miscommunication.  He argued that the investigator’s summary is incorrect, and that42
she “mis-comprehended” his statements during the lengthy interview.  However, he43
adopted the summary, including his denial of a past clearance denial, without comment
or objection in August 2010 - while incongruously referencing back to his initial
disclosure of a denial in his 2009 application. Moreover, in reference to the
investigator’s summary, he later stated in his response to the SOR that he had not been
provided with the opportunity to review or comment on the summary. Yet at the hearing,
11
 
he acknowledged that he adopted the summary’s contents when he completed the
2010 interrogatory. 
While it is recognized that English is not Applicant’s first language, he has been
actively employed as a linguist by U.S. defense contractors for his translation and
cultural expertise for many years. Moreover, he is not a novice with regard to the
security clearance process. Applicant has completed multiple security clearance
applications. He has been interviewed by investigators more than once. It can be
assumed that he also had previous experience completing interrogatories. He appeared
before a DOHA administrative judge once before, and appealed the resultant decision.
Furthermore, the adverse 2006 decision was based, at least in part, on issues related
to incomplete answers or misunderstandings. Consequently, he knew or should have
known that full, frank, and candid answers are an integral part of this process. 
In 2010, however, when given the opportunity to review and note any corrections
regarding his October 2009 subject interview summary, Applicant adopted the summary
as written. He did so without qualification or correction. This adoption included the
unqualified statement that “subject is not aware of ever having a clearance denied,
suspended or revoked.” Given such an opportunity, a reasonable person would have
then noted any misstatements or registered any disputes about his broad statement if it
was untrue or incorrect. This is particularly true for an individual with considerable
experience in the investigatory and interview process. Consequently, I conclude that
Applicant must have intentionally falsified or provided a misleading answer when he
made this representation during his interview. My conclusion is further bolstered by
Applicant's denial in his Response to the SOR that he had not had an opportunity to
review and comment on the interview summary previously, when, in fact, it was shown
at hearing that he had adopted the interview summary in his 2010 interrogatory. Given
these facts, neither Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual
made prompt, good faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification
before being confronted with the facts), AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under circumstances
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment), nor AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) apply.
None of the other mitigating conditions apply.
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudication can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
12
 
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
discussed in the conclusions below.
The country at issue is Lebanon. Due consideration is given to those facts set
forth above regarding that country. It is noted, however, that while the government of
Lebanon is not known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and is not
directly associated with terrorist activity, it does recognize a foreign terrorist organization
(Hizbollah) as a legitimate resistance group and political party. Hizballah and its
associates have been directly linked to terrorist activity and information gathering efforts
within the United States. It is also recognized that the situation in Lebanon has not
significantly improved since Applicant’s family members were last examined by a DOHA
administrative judge in 2006, and that neither the presence of nor the threat
represented by Hizballah has waned. Therefore, heightened scrutiny is warranted with
regard to the admitted allegations concerning Applicant’s relatives with citizenship and
residency in Lebanon (two sisters, brother, and brother-in-law who serves as an officer
in the Lebanese Army). Those familial relationships, as well as his relationship with a
Lebanese friend living in Kuwait, give rise to Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions
AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign
person, group, or country by providing that information). With disqualifying conditions
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
Due in part to his siblings’ resistance to give Applicant the deference and respect
culturally extended to the eldest sibling and head of the family, Applicant does not
maintain close relationships with his foreign siblings. Applicant has two sisters who are
residents and citizens of Lebanon. His oldest sister is a widow and homemaker. They
maintain negligible contact. His next oldest sister is a homemaker married to an officer
in the Lebanese Army. They only exchange perfunctory greetings on major holidays.
Applicant’s brother, who was incarcerated in the United States before being deported
back to Lebanon, is also a resident and citizen of the Lebanon. Applicant’s relationship
with his brother is “not good,” and the facts indicate both that the two are estranged and
that the Applicant is unhappy with his younger sibling’s failure to respect his authority.
There is nothing in the record to indicate that any of these siblings are agents of a
foreign power or is in a position to be exploited. Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition
AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens
13
 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation) applies to these three siblings. 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is an officer in the Lebanese Army. However, the two
have not seen each other since about 2001, after the death of Applicant’s father.  Given
the perfunctory nature of communications between Applicant and the officer’s wife, it
may be concluded that subsequent written or telephonic contact between Applicant and
the officer, if any, has been minimal. Applicant’s position of vulnerability with regard to
his brother-in-law is minimal. Also at issue is a friend from Applicant’s teenage years in
Kuwait. This individual is a citizen of Lebanon and a resident of Kuwait. Applicant
credibly depicted the natural disintegration of their relationship due to time and
geography. Applicant’s depiction of this childhood friend clearly represents a casual
acquaintance, an assessment supported by a current close friend of Applicant. With
regard to this individual and Applicant’s brother-in-law, AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty to or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) and, to a greater
degree, AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation) applies.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a mature man with some post-secondary education and nine years
experience as a linguist. He immigrated to this country to pursue his education and
refine his English language skills. He is dedicated to his work. Applicant was wounded
on one of his four foreign deployment while in service to this country. When he
completed the 2009 security clearance application, he had experience with the security
clearance process, including the completion and certification of a security clearance
applications, cooperating with investigators, and appearing at a DOHA hearing. This is
the second time Applicant’s answers during the security clearance process have raised
significant security concerns regarding personal conduct and his participation in the
clearance application and investigation process. He knew the importance of actively
14
 
giving detailed, accurate, and consistent answers to relevant questions, and the
responsibility of verifying those answers. 
With regard to issues concerning foreign influence, despite the continued unrest
in Lebanon and the growing influence of Hizballah, Applicant provided sufficient
information regarding his foreign siblings, in-law, and childhood friend to mitigate
foreign influence security concerns. He did so mainly by highlighting their increasingly
casual relationships and infrequent contact. He also demonstrated that those same
factors do not create a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion.
What remains worrisome are issues regarding personal conduct and his
reliability. In his September 2009 application, he indicated that he had a security
clearance denied in 2006. Then in  October 2009, he recanted that information and
stated that he was not aware of ever having a clearance denied – even though he had
undergone an onerous process in 2006 that culminated in a 2007 Appeal Board
decision. Next, in August 2010, he incongruously reaffirmed his September 2009
security clearance application disclosure of a 2006 denial – yet adopted in whole
without comment or correction the October 2009 interviewer’s summary. Then in 2011,
he denied having been provided the opportunity to review the investigator’s summary.
Later, at the hearing, he acknowledged the interrogatory containing his adoption of that
summary.
It is possible that the interviewer was mistaken in her summary. Yet it was
Applicant’s responsibility to note any objections or mistakes in that summary when he
was given that opportunity in 2010. Rather than note any objections or cite to any
mistakes at that time, however, he both adopted her summary and his denial of never
having had a security clearance denied – never raising any issues regarding the
accuracy of the summary. To now disavow that adopted summation as a simple
oversight seems self-serving. It also raises serious issues regarding judgment, candor,
and reliability. 
I have duly considered all the exhibits and relevant facts in this case, including
Applicant’s familiarity and past issues with the investigatory and administrative hearing
process, the past admonitions regarding the necessity of his providing full and candid
answers throughout that process, his linguistic fluency, his answers to relevant
questions, and his overall testimony. There is no evidence that Applicant is disloyal.
However, his failure to consistently, fully, directly, and honestly provide clear answers to
direct questions sustains personal conduct security concerns. As noted, any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of national security. Clearance is denied.
 As noted, supra, ¶ 2.a was amended to incorporate the substance of the struck ¶ 2.d.44
15
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT44
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
