 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08573 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2011, and initially requested an 
administrative determination. Subsequently, on July 20, 2011, he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on August 2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on August 25, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B at the 
hearing. The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was 
held open until September 30, 2011. Applicant submitted additional evidence before the 
record closed. That evidence was admitted without objection as AE C. Department 
Counsel’s transmittal memorandum was marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Based upon evidence adduced at hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend 
the SOR to add an allegation under Guideline F. The allegation would be new SOR ¶ 
1.c, stated as follows: “You failed to file your 2009 and 2010 state and federal tax 
returns as required. As of August 25, 2011, these tax returns remain unfiled.” Applicant 
raised no objection to the proposed amendment and did not ask for additional time to 
prepare for the new information. He also admitted to the factual allegation stated in the 
amendment. The motion was granted based upon Directive ¶ E3.1.17.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, including the amended 
SOR, and those admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings, testimony and admitted exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 49-year-old owner of a business who contracts with a defense contractor. 
He is single, having been divorced, and has no children. He holds a bachelor’s degree. 
He does not have any prior military service. He has held a top secret security clearance 
since 2004.2  
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent federal and state tax obligations that resulted in 
the filing of liens against Applicant’s property. Applicant also failed to file his 2009 and 
2010 federal and state income tax returns, as required. The federal tax debt was listed 
on credit reports obtained on June 12, 2009 and October 4, 2010. He admitted to the 
state tax obligation and to the failure to file his tax returns.3  
 
 Applicant’s initial tax issues arose in 2001 because of a business transaction. In 
the 1990s, Applicant worked for a commercial computer company during what was 
known as the “dot com boom”. He worked for this company for a number of years and 
was very successful. As part of that success, he acquired significant stock in the 
company. In 2000, he decided to start his own company so he quit his employment at 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 75-77. 
 
2 Tr. at 5-6, 40, 75; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 36, 60, 65. 
 
 
3 
 
the commercial computer company. To finance his new venture, he acquired a bank 
loan that was secured by his stock holdings in his former company (this stock was 
valued at approximately $1.3 million). Because of several reasons, including the dot 
com bubble burst and a law suit by Applicant’s new company against a competitor for 
intellectual property theft, Applicant’s business failed. The bank then took and sold the 
stock Applicant used as collateral for his business loan. This transaction resulted in a 
taxable event. Applicant stated he was given conflicting advice from his company’s chief 
financial officer and company counsel about whether he was personally responsible for 
the tax obligation resulting from the bank sale of the stock. The IRS considered 
Applicant responsible for the tax liability. From 2001 through 2005, Applicant sought 
advice on how to deal with this issue. There were also some uncertainties about the 
amount Applicant owed. In 2005, Applicant acknowledged his liability for the tax owed. 
The IRS determined the amount Applicant owed was $283,367 for tax year 2001.4 
 Applicant was unemployed between January 2001 and May 2002 after his 
company’s failure. He then worked for several commercial contractors through 2007. 
Since 2007, he has been self-employed, contracting work through a defense contractor. 
In 2006, the IRS began to levy against Applicant’s assets, such as his bank account, 
and garnish his wages to apply against his tax liability. In June 2007, Applicant decided 
to use his 401K retirement funds to pay a substantial portion of his remaining 2001 tax 
debt. Those funds in the amount of $233,657 were made available and applied by the 
IRS to the tax debt. However, because of the tax deferred nature of his 401K funds, 
Applicant incurred a new tax liability for this taxable event in 2007. Applicant could not 
pay the amount owed and the IRS filed a tax lien for tax year 2007 against Applicant’s 
property in the amount of $121,780. As of August 24, 2011, IRS records also show, 
despite the various substantial levies made against Applicant’s assets over the years, 
he still owes over $268,824 on his 2001 tax obligation. Applicant hired a tax attorney to 
work out a settlement with the IRS. Those discussions are ongoing, but no resolution 
has occurred. Concerning the state tax liability, Applicant acknowledges that he owes 
approximately $7,000 for the 2001 tax year, but decided to resolve the federal tax 
issues before he addressed the state tax debt.5    
 Applicant admitted not filing either his federal or state tax returns for 2009 and 
2010. He stated his reason for not filing was because he does not believe he made any 
taxable income for those years. He failed to present evidence that he had no obligation 
to file a tax return because his income was less than the amount of his personal 
exemptions and his standard deduction. Even though the record was left open over 30 
days beyond the hearing date, Applicant failed to provide evidence concerning the 
status of his 2009 and 2010 federal and state tax returns.6  
 
 Applicant’s current financial condition, aside from his tax issues, is tenuous. As of 
the date of the hearing, he had not generated any income for 2011. This is because he 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30, 41-47; GE 5; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-32, 35-36, 47; GE 3, 5; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 60-61, 65-66, 75-77, 81. 
 
 
4 
 
is dependent on federal contracts and because of the ongoing federal budget issues, 
there was no money available. He does expect to make about $70,000 by the end of the 
year. He is current on his mortgage, but is reliant on his savings and loans from family 
members to make ends meet. He currently owes his mother approximately $48,000. He 
would like to offer the IRS about $121,000 to settle all of his tax debts (2001 and 2007), 
but he would have to borrow the money from friends and family to make that payment.7 
 
 Applicant submitted two character letters from former associates. They describe 
Applicant as being very trustworthy and having great integrity.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 64, 66-68, 70. 
 
8 AE A, C. 
 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has been unable to satisfy his federal and state tax obligations dating 
back to 2001. He has also failed to file his 2009 and 2010 federal and state income tax 
returns. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although Applicant has made some payments toward his large tax obligation, a 
large amount for two different tax years is still owed. It is unlikely Applicant will 
experience the tax consequences of a large stock sale in the future, however, 
Applicant’s failure to file two years of tax returns casts doubt upon his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced conflicting advice about his initial tax liability from the 
stock sale in 2001. His delayed response to the tax obligation resulted from his advice 
and was a condition beyond his control. However, in order for this mitigating condition to 
fully apply, the Applicant must also act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
hired a tax attorney and made significant payments toward the tax debt, thus showing 
responsible action. However, he also generated more tax liability for himself in 2007 
when he used his 401K retirement fund to partially pay his 2001 tax debt. Not all of his 
actions show responsible behavior. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant sought the advice of a tax attorney to help him with his IRS debt. 
Although he has made strides in paying off his significant tax debt, a large amount 
remains unpaid. The only plan he has to pay off the remaining tax debt is to offer the 
IRS a settlement amount, hope they accept, and borrow the money from friends or 
family to pay the settlement. Additionally, he failed to file his 2009 and 2010 tax returns 
as required. Therefore, his finances are not being resolved and are not under control. 
His partial payments to the IRS and his attempt to reach a settlement with the IRS are 
insufficient to support a finding that he made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise 
resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the character letters of support for Applicant. I also considered the 
circumstances surrounding his failed business that led to the forced stock sale creating 
his tax liability in 2001. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. 
Despite some action on his part to pay his tax debt, a large tax liability still remains with 
no apparent means to pay it. Additionally, he was aware of his obligation to file his 2009 
and 2010 tax returns, but failed to do so. His past financial track record dealing with his 
tax obligation reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to question his 
ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
