 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05400 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR with an undated response, and requested an 
administrative determination. Department Counsel made a timely request for a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 4, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on August 25, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A-B 
that were admitted without objection. Applicant’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. These 
admissions will be treated as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He has been married one year and has no children. 
Since 2008, he has worked as quality production technician for a defense contractor. He 
has a bachelor’s degree. He has no military background, has never deployed for his 
current company, and has never held a security clearance in the past.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) continued use of alcohol 
since November 2009; (2) being diagnosed as alcohol dependent in June 2006; (3) 
receiving substance abuse treatment in 2003; (4) being arrested and charged with 
driving under the influence (DUI) in February 2003; (5) receiving substance abuse 
treatment in 1998 and 1999; (6) being charged with operating a vehicle under the 
influence of alcohol (OUI) in October 1997; (7) receiving substance abuse counseling in 
1991; (8) being arrested for OUI in June 1991; (9) being arrested for being a minor in 
possession of alcohol  in July and August 1990; (10) being arrested for possession of 
marijuana and drug paraphernalia in March 1999. 
  
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was 16 years old and first became 
intoxicated at the same age. His drink of choice was beer. One of his underage alcohol 
possession charges happened when he attended a high school party that the police 
interrupted. The other underage alcohol incident occurred when he was cited by a 
police officer for holding an open container of alcohol during a local parade. He was 
arrested for his first OUI in 1991. He consumed several beers while eating at a 
restaurant then he and a friend drove away. He was stopped by police for not 
completely stopping at a stop sign or light. He pleaded guilty and was ordered into 
alcohol counseling. Because of his youth, the counseling had very little impact on him at 
the time. In 1997, he was arrested for his second offense OUI. On this occasion, he had 
been drinking beers with his uncle when he went to pick up his aunt who had car 
trouble. He was stopped by the police when his aunt threw an empty beer can at the 
police car. He was given breathalyzer tests that registered blood alcohol results of .14% 
and .13%. He was again ordered by the court to attend substance abuse treatment in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 30-32; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
1998. He attended and completed court-ordered substance abuse treatment in 1998 
and 1999. In March 1999, while visiting his cousin, he was cited and fined for 
possession of marijuana and paraphernalia while partying outside of a local beachside 
bar. He does not recall who gave him the marijuana. He has not used marijuana or any 
other drug since that occurrence. In February 2003, he was at a bar with a friend, who 
was supposed to be the designated driver, and ended up driving from the bar. He does 
not remember how much alcohol he consumed. He was stopped by the police for 
speeding. His blood alcohol level was .14%. He was arrested and charged with OUI. 
Once again he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to probation, which included court-
ordered alcohol treatment. He completed the drug counseling program and was 
released from probation. In June 2006, he was evaluated by a licensed substance 
abuse counselor for the purpose of determining whether his driving privileges could be 
restored. The counselor considered Applicant’s entire substance abuse history, his test 
results, and his criminal offenses. The counselor diagnosed Applicant as alcohol 
dependent currently in a full sustained remission. The counselor based this diagnosis 
on Applicant’s three year history of abstinence at that time and his Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) participation. The counselor also recommended that Applicant 
continue AA attendance at least once a week in order to assist with his on-going 
abstinence.2  
 
 From 2003 to 2006, applicant totally abstained from using alcohol. He claims the 
last time he was intoxicated was in 2003. Several events in his life have caused him to 
change his way of life from when he was abusing alcohol. He got married recently. He 
bought a house and he finished college. He also obtained his current job. He also 
moved away from the state where he experienced all of his alcohol-related arrests and 
he longer associates with the people from that state. He has not had any updated 
alcohol diagnosis since 2006. He started drinking alcohol on a very limited basis again 
in 2007 or 2008. Now he only drinks three to four times a year and does not drink to the 
point of intoxication. He participated in AA up until about 2008 when he stopped. The 
last time he drank was one or two months before the hearing while camping with 
friends. He drank 12 beers over a two day period on that camping trip. Applicant does 
not currently believe he has a problem with consuming alcohol.3  
 
 Applicant is supported by two character letters attesting to his honesty, 
trustworthiness, and integrity. Applicant is viewed as a dedicated and valued 
employee.4 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 35-49; GE 5-8. 
 
3 Tr. at 50, 53-57, 63; GE 6. 
 
4 AE A-B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s three DUI or OUI arrests and his pattern of drinking through of 2003, 
along with his diagnosis of alcohol dependence, support the application of all the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
 
6 
 
 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Although Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident involving law enforcement was 
in 2003, he was convicted of three intoxicated driving incidents and had several alcohol-
related incidents as a minor. These incidents were not infrequent, nor did they happen 
under unusual circumstances. Applicant still uses alcohol despite his past track record, 
thus he has not established that similar future incidents are unlikely to occur. AG ¶ 23(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2006. The counselor making 
the diagnosis also found him in remission, but that part of the diagnosis was contingent 
upon Applicant’s abstinence and his AA participation neither of which apply to him 
currently. Applicant does not currently acknowledge that he has an alcohol abuse 
problem and since he began drinking again in 2008, he has not established a pattern of 
abstinence. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply.  
 
 Although Applicant completed at least three alcohol treatment programs, he has 
not continued his abstinence or his AA participation as recommended by the licensed 
alcohol counselor who diagnosed him as being alcohol dependent. AG ¶ 23(d) does not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the Personal Conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s alcohol related conduct is fully discussed above in the Guideline G 
analysis. The same allegations are crossed alleged as personal conduct that could 
cause a vulnerability to exploitation. Additionally, Applicant’s use of marijuana and 
subsequent arrest for possession also could cause a vulnerability to his personal 
standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
Although Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident involving law enforcement was 
in 2003, he was convicted of three intoxicated driving incidents and had several alcohol-
related incidents as a minor. These incidents were not infrequent, nor did they happen 
under unusual circumstances. Applicant still uses alcohol despite his past track record, 
thus he has not established that similar future incidents are unlikely to occur. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply. 
 Applicant testified credibly that he has not used marijuana since 1999 and has 
therefore taken appropriate steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation. 
AG ¶ 17(e) applies to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s age, 
education, history of alcohol-related arrests, his 2006 diagnosis as being alcohol 
dependent, his discontinued commitment to AA, and his character references. I also 
considered that Applicant still consumes alcohol on a regular basis despite his history. 
Applicant has not presented sufficient mitigating evidence to overcome the alcohol 
concerns stated in the SOR allegations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
