 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06103 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
November 7, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct and Handling Protected 
Information security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
E, Personal Conduct and K, Handling Protected Information. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases dated after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 13, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 22, 2010. The hearing was scheduled and convened on 
 
2 
 
August 19, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 1 through 4 
were admitted without objection. Applicant’s counsel objected to GE 5, page 4, 
paragraphs three, four, and five and GE 6. GE 6 was admitted over the objection of 
Applicant’s counsel. GE 5 is discussed, below. The Government also presented GE 7, a 
Memorandum of Law addressing the admissibility of the contested portions of GE 5, 
post-hearing. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through M, to which there was no 
objection, and AE A-M were admitted. Applicant called four witnesses, and testified on 
his own behalf. The Applicant also presented AE N, a Memorandum of Law addressing 
the admissibility of GE 5, page 4, paragraphs three, four, and five, post-hearing. The 
admissibility of the contested portions of GE 5 is addressed below. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 7, 2011.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
The Applicant objected to GE 5, page 4, paragraphs three, four, and five, based 
upon Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) 801(c) because these paragraphs contained 
“multiple out of court statements offered into evidence to prove the truth of the matter 
asserted.” While Applicant recognized that hearsay can be admissible in administrative 
proceedings, he argued that several specific provisions of the Directive prohibit its use 
including: ¶ E3.1.22 permitting an applicant the opportunity to cross-examine the person 
making the statement and ¶ E3.1.20, permitting authentication of documents or 
evidence compiled or created in the regular course of business if furnished by an 
investigating agency. Applicant argued that the contested portions of GE 5, do not 
constitute a “record.” Therefore, he submits the contested portions of GE 5 do not fall 
under a hearsay exception and are dissimilar to documents admitted in other 
proceedings. (AE N.) 
 
Department Counsel avers that under ¶ E3.1.19 of the Directive, the FRE are 
only guidance and may be relaxed. The Appeal Board has found documents similar to 
the Air Force denial letter admissible as an exception to the hearsay rule under FRE 
803(6) and 803(8).1 Further, Department Counsel argued that the right to confrontation 
in a security clearance adjudication under ¶ E3.1.22 is not violated by the admission of 
documents that fall within well-established exception to the hearsay rule.2 (GE 7.) 
 
I agree with Department Counsel’s argument set forth in GE 7. This case calls for 
relaxed application of the FRE. In order to permit the development of a full and 
complete record by the parties the contested portions of GE 5 are admitted. Applicant’s 
objections will be taken into consideration when allocating weight to the contested 
portions of GE 5, below. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 05-14135 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-199 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2005); DISCR 
Case No. 02-12199 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 2006). 
2 See DISCR Case No. 03-06770 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2004); ISCR Case No. 96-0575 (July 22, 1997). 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, and 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old systems engineer for a government contractor. He is 
single and has no children. In 2006 he earned a masters degree from a prestigious 
university. He has been employed with a government contractor since August 2006. 
(GE 1; Tr. 104-105, 137.) 
 
 On or about June 6, 2006, he submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions. 
In Section 24 of this form he was asked about his illegal drug use in the last seven 
years. He indicated, “No,” to this question. (GE 1.)  
 
 On August 7, 2007, Applicant again completed a Security Clearance Application 
(EPSQ). On this form he was asked, “27. Your use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity-
Illegal Use of Drugs Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, 
have you illegally used any controlled substances, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?” He answered this question, 
“No.” He was also asked, “28. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity-Use in 
Sensitive Positions Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while 
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting 
public safety?” Applicant answered, “No.”(GE 2.) 
 
 On October 6, 2008, Applicant completed another Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions. Question 23 “Illegal use of Drugs or Drug Activity” asked Applicant: 
 
The following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your 
failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or 
action against you. Neither your truthful responses nor information derived 
from your responses will be used against you in any subsequent criminal 
proceeding.  
 
A. In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substances, 
for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamines, Ecstacy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of controlled 
substances includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, 
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance. 
 
4 
 
 
B. Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while possessing 
a security clearance; while employed as a law enforcement officer, 
prosecutor, or courtroom official; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety? (Emphasis in original.) (GE 3.) 
 
Applicant answered “No” to parts A and B, above.  
 
 In March 2008 Applicant was denied a top secret security clearance with the Air 
Force. When interviewed by an authorized agent of the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), he gave three reasons for the denial, including: “a security 
violation involving classified material; alleged drug use; and personal conduct (cell 
phone in closed area).” (GE 4.) These reasons are consistent with the reasons for 
denial set out in the Department of Air Force letter dated June 12, 2008. (GE 5.)  
 
Security Violation Involving Classified Material 
 
 The Report of Investigation (ROI), which Applicant adopted as accurately 
reflecting his interview, indicates that Applicant was given a polygraph examination as 
part of his top secret security clearance application. The ROI reflects: 
 
[Applicant] stated that during the polygraph he was asked if he has ever 
disclosed classified information to an unauthorized person. He stated that 
the polygrapher indicated some uneasiness with his negative response 
and he advised that he did discuss in very general terms the capability of 
current radars with a long time female friend [witness # 4] while having 
dinner. [Applicant] stated that he jokingly told [witness # 4] that current 
radars could detect an object in [city A] from[city B]. [Applicant] stated that 
the polygraph operator was not trained in radar technology and errored 
(sic) in concluding that classified information was disclosed. [Applicant] 
stated that no technical details such as exact mileage limitations or 
capabilities were discussed and he believes that he did not disclose any 
classified information. (GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant also explained the incident in which it was alleged he disclosed 
classified materials to an unclassified person in his July 10, 2008 letter to the Air Force. 
He wrote: 
 
Regarding [disclosure of classified information to an unclassified person], I 
did not disclose classified information to an unclassified person. This 
again is a matter that with a lot of gray that you are misconstruing as a 
black and white matter.  To summarize the incident, my friend [witness #4] 
likes to tease me because I work in an industry where I handle “classified” 
information. One day she jokingly asked me to tell her some classified 
information. I cannot stress this enough when I say this was all done in 
jest. I then tell her that our radar can detect targets from City A to City B. I 
did not disclose the actual number. I did not disclose classified 
 
5 
 
information to an unclassified person.(GE 5 at 9.) (Emphasis in 
original.) 
 
 Throughout the hearing, Applicant continued to deny any allegation that he 
disclosed classified information to an unauthorized person. He claimed his statement 
that “radars could detect an object in [city A] from [city B]” was unclassified and 
supported his claim with the testimony of his team lead, former supervisor, and co-
worker. He called witness #4, the person he allegedly made the statement to, who 
testified about the nature of Applicant’s statement to her. She indicated: “The event like 
happened so long ago I can't remember what was said but we talked about radar or 
something and that's it.” Applicant also introduced published documentation into 
evidence regarding the capabilities of radar to prove that the information he repeated 
was unclassified. However, while he was testifying, he changed his wording of the 
statement allegedly made to indicate a specific object, instead of the generic term, “an 
object,” referred to in his unclassified statement. (GE 4; AE K; AE L; AE M;Tr. 40-90, 
119-128.) 
 
 In questioning, Applicant was asked what he was permitted to tell others about 
his job. He indicated: 
 
A: Um, I guess you can say what your job title is, you can say you know 
what type of an engineer you are so in my case I'm a systems engineer.  
 
Q: Okay. So opposing counsel doesn't pull on his hair, were you 
authorized to disclose the information you did disclose to [witness #4]?  
A: Um, I mean no one said –  
Q: No one said you couldn't but did anybody say you could? 
A: No.  
Q: Okay. Did you inquire of anybody about what you could release? 
A: Um, no. (Tr. 126.) 
 
Drug Use 
  
 Applicant also indicated to the OPM agent that Applicant admitted he disclosed 
taking “a puff from a marijuana cigarette,” once during college in 2005 and again in 
2007 while waiting with a friend to enter a movie, to the Air Force during his pre-
polygraph interview. He confirmed that he was a government contractor with a secret 
security clearance at the time he used marijuana in 2007. (GE 4.) 
 
 In a letter dated July 10, 2008 to the Air Force regarding the denial of his top 
secret clearance, Applicant addressed his marijuana use. He indicated: 
 
 
6 
 
. . . it is true that I have been exposed to marijuana twice in my life (the 
two times listed above) – the issue of whether or not I have smoked 
marijuana is another matter. I did not feel any effects from having 
“smoked” marijuana in the two mentioned incidents. I held the marijuana 
cigarette to my mouth and inhaled, but immediately exhaled and thus blew 
out the marijuana smoke. I feel as though my “marijuana usage” is being 
taken out of context. The first incident involved some college friends and I 
at a college party just having a good time. While some friends were 
smoking some marijuana cigarettes the whole night, I simply held the joint 
to my mouth a few times before socializing with other groups the rest of 
the night. The second incident involved myself and another friend and 
while he was smoking, I took one puff and did not inhale. (GE 5 at 8-9.) 
 
 He explained that he did not list his marijuana use on his security clearance 
questionnaires because of “semantics.” He stated “I did not personally obtain the 
marijuana myself. I did not “inhale”. (sic) I did not partake in the activity for more than a 
few minutes each time.” (GE 5 at 8-9.) At hearing, he testified: 
 
I answered no because I felt like it didn't qualify as using marijuana 
because the first time was in 2005, it was my last year in college, I was at 
a party and I mean it was like less than five minutes I think.  I mean it was 
like two puffs, you know, it was one of those deals where you're kind of 
sitting in a -- not sitting we were standing in a circle and a joint was being 
passed around.  I never felt the effects of it, I didn't feel like it qualified as 
using marijuana.  
 
And the second time was in 2007 so it was actually after I started at 
[government contractor]. I was watching a movie and I remember it was 
with two other friends and one of the friends he left the car and then it was 
just me and another friend and this is like ten minutes before the movie. 
 
And all of a sudden he takes out marijuana and this time it was literally, I 
mean he was smoking marijuana in the car and I think, well I know I took 
one puff and exactly one and that was it. And so to me it just didn't feel like 
it really qualified as using marijuana so that's the reason that when I filled 
out these forms, you know, not to be confused with someone who does it 
daily or weekly or monthly or annually or whatever the case is, it was just -
- I've obviously never felt the effects of it or inhaled all the way. So that's 
the reason why I answered no. (Tr. 108-109.) 
 
 He testified that he didn’t consider himself to have inhaled the marijuana 
because, “when I say I didn't inhale what I mean is that I put the cigarette to my mouth 
and then I blew in and immediately blew out and it didn't go down my throat or it didn't 
go into my lungs.” He did so knowing his employer has a zero tolerance policy against 
drugs.  Applicant indicated he will never use marijuana again. (Tr. 107-108, 139.) 
 
 
 
7 
 
Cell Phone in Closed Area 
 
 He also discussed with the OPM agent his admission to the Air Force of 
inadvertently wearing his cell phone in a closed secured work area. (GE 4.) With 
respect to the cell phone violations, Applicant explained that he estimated the number of 
violations and “guestimated 60 times.” He also asserted that “Everyone is bound to 
forget the rules on occasion.” (GE 5 at 9.) He attached a copy of the “Prohibitions on 
Electronic Devices in Classified Work Environments” along with his July 10, 2008 letter 
when he answered Interrogatories on December 23, 2009. (GE 5 at 10-11; Tr. 112-
116.) 
 
 In a letter dated January 11, 2010, which Applicant attached to his Answers to 
the Interrogatories, he surmised that he had mistakenly walked into a closed area with 
his cell phone approximately “5% of the time,” and indicated the estimate of “60 times” 
he gave the polygrapher was an unusually high number. He further asserted that he did 
not use his cell phone to make calls or text while in closed areas. Applicant claimed that 
others at his company also had violated this policy by taking cell phones into closed 
areas and supported his claim with the testimony of three witnesses. Applicant has 
been counseled by his Team Leader for his cell phone violation and has not violated 
this policy since at least February 2010. (GE 4; Tr. 46-48, 66-70; 75-89; 112-116.) 
 
 Applicant has the trust of his friends, sibling, girlfriend, co-workers, Supervisor, 
former Supervisor, and Team Lead. His Supervisor indicates Applicant “is a great asset 
and has shown great potential and [the supervisor] believes he can be trusted to follow 
up on all security regulations.” His “Team Lead Applicant’s Performance & Development 
Summary” indicates he is an organized and detail oriented team player. He has been 
“exceptional” in his work performance and was selected for a rotation in a prestigious 
program. In 2009, he was credited as “honest, forthright, and trustworthy” as his key 
strengths. (AE A-J; Tr. 40-89.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
8 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
 
9 
 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant deliberately omitted his marijuana use on his security clearance 
applications completed in June 7, 2006, August 7, 2007, and October 6, 2008. His 
explanation that he answered, “No,” to all of the questions regarding drug use, and drug 
use with a security clearance, on his three security clearance applications because he 
only inhaled into his mouth not into his lungs, does not justify his falsification. Question 
23, on the October 6, 2008 application is abundantly clear, if Applicant was honestly 
confused in his earlier two Applications, that: “Use of controlled substances includes 
injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise consuming any 
controlled substance (emphasis added).” Yet, he answered no to this question. He did 
not seek advice or clarification on the drug use questions when completing any of the 
questionnaires. I find Applicant sought to conceal his 2005 and 2007marijuana use in all 
three questionnaires. AG ¶ 16(a) is disqualifying. 
 
 In addition to his falsification alleged in 1.a through 1.f, Applicant has also 
demonstrated poor personal conduct that could subject him to vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress as alleged in 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. Applicant elected to 
use marijuana while in possession of a security clearance, he brought a prohibited 
device (his cell phone) into a secure area on multiple occasions, and he discussed 
classified information with an unauthorized person. The Applicant admitted that the Air 
Force denied his previous clearance application based upon these three reasons. Each 
of these allegations are serious and could place Applicant in a place of vulnerability.  
His credibility with respect to his claimed explanations of these allegations is 
questionable, since he has falsified information to the government in the past. Applicant 
has not met his burden to show his personal conduct does not raise questions about his 
judgment and would not affect his personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to or by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully: 
 
 
10 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant's falsification and poor personal conduct are unmitigated. Falsification 
of information provided to the Government cannot be considered minor. Although 
Applicant disclosed his marijuana use in the interview before his polygraph examination, 
it was years after his initial falsification. The record contains no evidence that he sought 
to correct his falsification promptly. His falsification was not based upon improper or 
inadequate advice but by his own unwillingness to disclose the truth about his marijuana 
use. Moreover, his decision to use marijuana, a substance that he knew was prohibited 
by his employer’s zero tolerance policy on drugs, while possessing a security clearance, 
indicates that Applicant lacks the judgment to possess a clearance. He also 
demonstrated poor judgment when he answered his friend’s inquiry to tell her 
something classified and when he entered a secured area with a prohibited device. He 
has not shown sufficient steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation. His 
promise to refrain from further violations lacks credibility, despite the testimony and 
evidence that applicant is a truthful person. AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) 
do not apply. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; and 
 
 
11 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
 I find Applicant has failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting 
classified information in both bringing a cell phone into a secured area and by 
discussing information with a friend that should not have been shared. Applicant was 
aware of the policies prohibiting cell phones in secured areas, but repeatedly violated 
this policy, contained in GE 5. Further, he should not have, even in jest, told his friend 
anything other than his job title and the type of engineer he was. AG ¶ 34(a) and 34(g) 
are disqualifying. 
 
AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant has responded favorably to his Team Leader’s counseling regarding 
his cell phone in secure areas. He has not had a violation since February 2010. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 35(a) and 35(b) are mitigating with respect to the cell phone. He 
acknowledged that he did not have proper training on what he was not permitted to 
repeat, however, Applicant is unwilling to admit wrongdoing when it comes to sharing 
improper information with his friend despite the Air Force’s decision on his earlier 
security clearance application. Thus, his lack of discretion in handling protected 
information cannot be fully mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and K in my whole-person analysis. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s character, as attested to by his friends, sibling, 
girlfriend, co-workers, supervisor, former supervisor, and team lead. He is generally 
thought to be truthful, honest, and trustworthy. He performs well at work and receives 
exceptional performance reviews. However, he has not demonstrated these traits when 
it comes to his personal conduct in response to government questions about his 
marijuana use; his choice to use marijuana while possessing a clearance; and his 
handling of protected information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct and Handling Protected 
Information security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 
13 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
