1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-06757
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I deny Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 24, 2008. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) on June 14, 2011, detailing security concerns under Guideline G,
Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, that provided the basis for its
preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 4.2
Id,; Item 5.3
2
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 21, 2011. He submitted a
notarized, written response to the SOR allegations dated July 8, 2011, and requested a
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on September 6, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on
September 12, 2011. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response.
DOHA assigned this case to me on October 31, 2011. The Government submitted 11
exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-11 and admitted into the record.
Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 3, and the
SOR has been marked as Item 1.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -
1h. of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He did not
admit or deny the factual allegations in ¶ 2.a of the SOR, which is deemed a denial.1
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following
additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 29 years old, works for a Department of Defense contractor. He
began his current employment in April 2008. He also served in the United States Army
for four years and received an honorable discharge in 2004.2
Applicant married in 2007. He has three children, ages 8, 5, and 3. His wife
works part time. He had financial problems, which he resolved through bankruptcy. His
finances are not an issue in this case.3
Applicant began drinking beer in 1995 or 1996 at age 13 or 14. Until he enlisted
in the Army in 2000, he drank 6 to 12 beers every other weekend with friends at their
homes, while camping, or in the canyon. While in the Army, he drank 8 to 18 beers
every other weekend with his buddies. After leaving the Army, Applicant continued to
drink 6 to 12 beers every other weekend from July 2004 to October 2007. During this
Item 5; Item 6.4
Item 5; Items 7-10.5
Item 5; Item 11.6
Item 6.7
3
time period, he stopped consuming beer for four to five months. Since October 2007, he
has continued to consume from 1 to 12 beers a week and indicates an intention to
continue drinking alcoholic beverages, after telling the security clearance investigator in
December 2008 that he did not intend to drink alcohol in the future.4
Applicant’s alcohol consumption lead to numerous alcohol-related arrests
between 1998 and 2008. The police first arrested Applicant for driving under the
influence of alcohol (DUI) in 1998. The police arrested him for DUI in 2001, 2002, 2004,
and 2008. The police also arrested him for public intoxication in 1999, 2005, 2006, and
2008. He pled guilty to the charges, and the court fined him, placed him on probation,
suspended his driver’s license, and sometimes sentenced him to jail for a short time.5
After his arrests and convictions in 2001 and 2004, Applicant attended alcohol
counseling classes as required by the courts. He completed both programs. Following
his DUI arrest in November 2008, Applicant enrolled in a substance abuse counseling
program. He attended the program as required. As part of the program requirements, he
underwent seven breathalyzer tests and six drug tests between March 2009 and August
2009. All tests had negative results. At the conclusion of the program, the counselor,
whose qualifications are unknown, diagnosed him as alcohol dependent and noted
spousal issues. The counselor also opined that Applicant had the necessary tools to
maintain sobriety, if he chose, but he lacked a support system and other outlets to help
him cope with stress and other problems.6
The record contains no evidence of work-related alcohol problems, and Applicant
denies any alcohol problems at work. He does not attend alcoholics anonymous, and he
does not take antabuse to help him abstain from drinking alcohol.7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
4
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
5
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program;
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and,
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education,
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
Applicant has an extensive history of alcohol-related incidents, including DUI and
public intoxication arrests, away from work. He is a habitual consumer of beer, and at
times, he consumed beer to the point of intoxication, as shown by his arrests. He has
been diagnosed as alcohol dependent by a counselor at a court-designated counseling
program. The Government has established its prima facie case under AG ¶¶ 22(a),
22(c), and 22(d).
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
6
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
I have reviewed the evidence of record under these mitigating conditions.
Applicant has not abstained from alcohol consumption and plans to continue consuming
alcohol each week. Although he has attended alcohol counseling and education
courses, he does not acknowledge a problem with alcohol despite his level of alcohol
consumption, which has increased over the years. He continues to consume alcohol
despite a diagnosis of alcohol dependency in 2009. He has not mitigated the
Government’s security concerns under Guideline H.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation;
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated
rehabilitation program; and,
7
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. 
Applicant has been charged with DUI on five separate occasions and with public
intoxication on four occasions between 1998 and 2008. The Government has
established its prima facie case under AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have
considered all the mitigating conditions, and especially the following:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
I have consider all the evidence of record under the above mitigating conditions.
It has been less than three years since Applicant’s last arrest and two years since he
completed his last alcohol treatment program. He continues to consume alcohol, which
could lead to another arrest for intoxication. His arrests are recent, and the record lacks
evidence of a successful rehabilitation. He has not mitigated the Government’s security
concerns under Guideline J. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
began consuming beer as a teenager and in significant quantities. He continues to
consume significant amounts of beer, even though he has been arrested at least nine
times for incidents directly related to his alcohol consumption. He has had financial
problems and marital problems, which are related in part to his alcohol use. Even
though he has attended alcohol counseling programs on three occasions, he continues
to drink beer to excess and plans to move forward with his drinking patterns. He does
not acknowledge an alcohol problem and lacks a support system to help him cease his
drinking. His drinking patterns remain a concern.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption
and criminal conduct under Guidelines G and J.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
