 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08555 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 30, 2011, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 20, 2011. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
he received it on June 7, 2011. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit a reply. 
The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel amended the SOR in the body of the FORM. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to object or respond to the amendment, but did not do so. The 
amended SOR narrowed the alleged time frame of marijuana use in SOR ¶ 1.a to “daily 
use from the 1970s until at least March 2009” and cocaine use in SOR ¶ 1.b to “May 
2007 to July 2007”. A new allegation (SOR ¶ 1.c) was added. It stated that Applicant 
cultivated marijuana. Since Applicant failed to respond to the amended allegations, his 
non-response will be taken as denials of all the allegations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He is divorced and has no children. He has an 
associate’s degree. He has worked for his current employer since 2009. He served in 
the Navy for six years from 1972 to 1978. He previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana with varying 
frequency, including periods of daily use from the 1970s to March 2009; using cocaine 
from May 2007 to about July 2007; and cultivating marijuana (See amended SOR ¶¶ 
1.a – 1.c). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana in the 1970s when he was in the Navy. In 
1977, he was fined for misdemeanor marijuana possession. More recently, he used 
marijuana on a daily basis for periods of time and his quantity of use was from one to 
three joints. He would take breaks from using marijuana from time to time throughout 
the years to prove to himself that he was not addicted to marijuana. In 1992, he was 
injured in a motorcycle accident. He suffered severe back, neck and head injuries. He 
suffers from severe back pain and migraines from the injuries and has been treated by 
doctors for the pain. He began using marijuana as a pain management tool. Applicant 
points out that he lives in a state that allows the use of marijuana for medical purposes. 
He failed to produce evidence that he had been authorized to use marijuana by a 
physician, a requirement by the state for allowing the legal use of marijuana. In 2008, he 
used marijuana on nearly a daily basis because of the pain he was experiencing. He 
grew marijuana in his home for his personal use, but he refused to provide the dates 
when he grew the marijuana.  He claims his last use of marijuana was in March 2009. 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
He does not believe his use of marijuana is unlawful because his state has legalized the 
medical use of marijuana. He continues to associate with friends who use marijuana.2  
  
 Applicant first used cocaine in the 1970s. He used cocaine on several other 
occasions between then and May 2007. In May 2007, he used cocaine three times with 
friends while on a fishing trip. He was asked by an investigator about the names of the 
people involved, but he refused to supply that information or other specific information 
about his use of cocaine in May 2007. He claims he stopped using cocaine after May 
2007.3 
 
 Applicant provided a written statement declaring his intent not to use drugs in the 
future. Applicant voluntarily attended a drug and alcohol awareness class in 
approximately 2005.4  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
2 Items 6-8. 
 
3 Items 6-7. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation … and possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana and cocaine on a number of occasions. He also grew 
marijuana for his own use. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
5 
 
 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was frequent and recent (last use March 2009). The 
period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the 
future. He is not a young person experimenting with drugs. Rather, he is a middle-aged 
man who has a drug history dating back to the 1970s. He also was not forthcoming to 
the investigator about his specific cocaine activity. His unwillingness to provide this 
information casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Additionally, he 
remains in contact with friends who are marijuana users. He has not met his burden to 
establish his intent not to use marijuana in the future, despite his statement to the 
contrary. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s statement 
of intent not to use drugs in the future. However, I also weighed that he used marijuana 
and cocaine on numerous occasions, and as recently as March 2009. Additionally, 
Applicant views his use of marijuana to be justified because his state allows for the 
medical use of marijuana. However, Applicant failed to provide evidence to show that he 
qualified for using marijuana under state law. Regardless, even if he had qualified, use 
 
6 
 
 
of marijuana is not legal under federal law which is controlling here. Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
