 
 
1  
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 10-06391 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
criminal conduct, financial considerations, and personal conduct. His request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(Standard Form 86) on January 14, 2010, to request a security clearance required as 
part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
 
2  
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
On March 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns focused on 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).
 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
2
 
 In his Answer to the SOR 
dated March 26, 2011, Applicant denied 4 of the 12 allegations under Guideline F. He 
admitted the seven allegations under Guideline J, and the seven allegations under 
Guideline E.  
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 17, 2011. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on August 31, 2011, and issued a Notice of Hearing on September 23, 
2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 25, 2011. At the hearing, I 
admitted Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. Applicant testified and offered one 
document, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record closed on October 
25, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He completed high school, and has also taken 
photography and criminal justice courses. He is engaged, and has one six-year-old 
daughter from a previous relationship. He has joint legal custody of his daughter, and 
pays child support. (GE 1; Tr. 22) 
 
 From 1999 to 2003, Applicant served in the Marine Corps. He has held a security 
clearance since 1999. He deployed to Afghanistan in 2001, after the September 11 
attack, and where he served for 18 months. He was involved in combat duty 
periodically. After his honorable discharge, he had substantial savings, which he used in 
part to pay his mother’s debts. He also contributed to the expenses of his aunt, with 
whom he lived. He testified that he was homeless for about six months during the period 
2004 to 2006. His security clearance application provides conflicting information, 
indicating that he lived with his aunt from 2003 to 2005, but also that he lived in a rental 
from 2004 to 2005. He also listed a rental from 2005 to 2006. (GE 1) Applicant worked 
full-time for three years as a mailroom clerk (2003-2006), and two years as an 
administrative clerk (2006-2008). From 2008 to 2009, he worked at short-term positions, 
and was unemployed for eight months. He began his current position with a defense 
                                                     
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
1 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which were implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 
2 to the Directive. 
 
 
 
3  
contractor in January 2010, where he works on-site in the equal opportunity section of a 
federal agency. (GE 1, 2; AE A; Tr. 37-40, 76-77) 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Between 1996 and 2007, Applicant was charged with the following criminal 
conduct. The record contains no evidence of criminal conduct since 2007.  
 
• 1996 – Breach of Trust, allegation 2.a - When Applicant was 18 years old, he 
worked for a “big box” discount store. He gave clothes and baby items to a friend 
without paying for them. He was terminated from his job, and charged with 
Breach of Trust. He testified he was “young and dumb” and displayed bad 
judgment. The case was dismissed. (GE 8; Tr. 24, 78-79)  
 
• 2000 – Shoplifting, allegation 2.b - Applicant testified that when he was 
stationed in Japan, he was with another younger Marine, who stole a video 
game. He testified that he “took the hit” of shoplifting for the other Marine. 
However, the Navy incident report states that he was observed on closed circuit 
television taking two video games and a music CD worth $51.43. The 
merchandise was found on his person. The report does not indicate that another 
Marine was present. Applicant received nonjudicial punishment (NJP), 60 days 
restriction, and 60 days extra duty. (GE 7; Tr. 24-27, 45, 79-81)  
 
• 2002 – Driving while Intoxicated (DWI), allegation 2.c – While on active duty, 
and after returning from Afghanistan, Applicant was drinking and driving. His 
blood alcohol level was at the legal limit for intoxication. He was charged with 
DWI. He was found guilty, fined, lost his driving privileges for 60 days, and was 
sentenced to 60 days unsupervised probation. He was required to take on-base 
alcohol counseling, and to teach younger Marines about the dangers of drunk 
driving. (GE 3; Tr. 24-27, 81-83) 
 
• 2003 –Aggravated Assault, allegation 2.d - Applicant was attacked by two 
men, who attempted to rob him. He fought back and was arrested, along with the 
assailants. He was charged with Aggravated Assault. The government dismissed 
the charge against Applicant and released him. Several days later, he was asked 
to appear in the case as a government witness. He testified against the 
assailants. (GE 3; Tr. 25-26, 84-85) 
 
• 2004 – Possession of Marijuana; Possession with Intent to Distribute 
Cocaine, allegation 2.e - Applicant was with several friends, near his aunt’s 
home. The police detained the group, and searched the area. They found 
cocaine in nearby bushes. Applicant and his friends were arrested. He admitted 
in his security interview that he was socializing with the wrong crowd. Applicant 
testified they were not his drugs and he did not know who owned them. The 
charges against Applicant were dismissed. (GE 3; Tr. 85-87) 
 
 
4  
 
• 2006 – Theft of $100 or Less, allegation 2.f – Applicant did not have the funds 
to pay for license plates for his car. He paid a lesser amount to a friend who 
worked at the Department of Motor Vehicles to obtain plates for him. He thought 
his friend was going to give him legitimate tags “under the table,” without paying 
for them. He testified that he did not know the plates were stolen. He was 
stopped by police and charged with theft. The charge was not prosecuted, but he 
was found guilty on another charge stemming from the same event (see 
allegation 2.g, below) (GE 5; Tr. 26-27, 87-89, 109-110, 115-116) 
 
• 2007 – Driving under the Influence of Alcohol, allegation 2.g – Applicant was 
drinking with friends. While driving home, he had a flat tire, pulled over to the 
curb, and waited for a tow truck. It was late, and a police officer stopped to 
check. During the license check, the officer discovered that Applicant's license 
plates were stolen. Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI, Theft of $100 
or Less (see allegation 2.f, above) and numerous violations including driving on 
an expired license, driving an unregistered vehicle, and operating an uninsured 
vehicle. Applicant pled guilty to DWI, and was sentenced to probation before 
judgment. He was fined more than $1,000, and his license was suspended for 90 
days. After this arrest, he attended alcohol classes two times per week for three 
months. (GE 3, 6; Tr. 27, 89-92)  
 
Applicant disclosed during his June 2010 security interview that he used 
marijuana from 1994 to 1997 about once per week with high school friends. After 
leaving the Marine Corps in 2003, where he served in combat, he was having trouble 
sleeping at night. He told the security investigator that he resumed using marijuana 
about once per week in 2003 to take the edge off. He stopped using marijuana when his 
girlfriend became pregnant in March 2004. He informed the security agent that he had 
no intent to use marijuana in the future. (GE 3) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent SOR debts total approximately $21,000. He met with an 
investigator in February 2010 to discuss these debts, as part of his security 
investigation. In November 2010, he completed an interrogatory in which he said he had 
been “in contact with several financial advisors to get my debt in order.” However, at the 
hearing he said he spoke with one financial counseling company. He did not retain the 
company. His fiancée’s employer has debt counseling available, and they have been 
discussing enrolling Applicant in that course, but he had not enrolled as of the date of 
the hearing. (GE 3, 4; Tr. 65-66, 112) 
 
 Applicant pays $796 in monthly child support payments. The SOR lists 
arrearages of $9,495, and Applicant's August 2011 credit report shows a balance of 
$9,598. However, Applicant testified that a portion of his monthly payment is applied to 
the arrearage. He believes it is currently approximately $8,000, but he did not submit 
documentation to support his claim. (GE 4, 11; Tr. 48-50) 
 
 
5  
 
 Applicant and his fiancée share the rent, but she does not contribute any other 
funds to Applicant's expenses. He has no checking account. He has not used credit 
cards in the past five years. He has about $60 in his savings account. He noted at the 
hearing that several changes have occurred since he completed his Personal Financial 
Statement (PFS) in November 2010. His portion of the rent has increased $85 per 
month; he now spends no money on clothes, reducing his monthly expenses by $80. 
His net monthly income is $1,500. His monthly expenses total $1,511. However, he now 
also pays an additional $400 per month in commuting expenses not listed on the PFS. 
With this additional expense, his current monthly net remainder (MNR) is negative $400. 
(GE 4; Tr. 66-72, 74-75, 110-111) 
 
 Applicant has not made any payments on the SOR debts because he works on a 
contract basis, and he is uncertain how long each contract will last. He does not want to 
commit to payment plans that he may not be able to fulfill, and he has not had additional 
funds available to pay these debts. However, his current supervisors are pleased with 
his performance. He is confident that he will be retained by the federal agency where he 
works, and intends to start working on paying his debts in the future. He does not have 
a debt payment plan in place. (Tr. 55-57, 62-63, 75-78) 
 
 Applicant's debts appear in his credit reports dated January 2010, and January 
and August 2011. His financial problems began in 2004, when he bought a car that had 
problems and the dealer would not honor the warranty. He was unable to keep up with 
the repair bills, and pay his other debts. The car was repossessed, and the unpaid 
deficiency is $5,984 (allegation 1.i). He called the lender, who stated he is responsible 
for the debt. It remains unresolved. He believes the gas bill at allegation 1.a belongs to 
a previous tenant. He testified that he did not have documentation related to past 
discussions with the utility company because his papers were lost or stolen when he 
was homeless. He has made no recent efforts to resolve a student loan debt listed at 
allegation 1.c. (GE 9-11; Tr. 41-47, 50-51, 58) 
 
 Applicant disputes a debt of $537 owed to a telephone company and has tried to 
have it removed from his report, but without success (allegation 1.d). He also disputes a 
cable company debt for an unreturned cable box (allegation 1.l). He faxed his receipt to 
the company, but the debt still appears on his credit report. He disputes a cell phone 
debt at allegation 1.k, because he believes his child’s mother owes it. The debt at 
allegation 1.g relates to a student loan. Applicant does not recognize the creditor, and 
disputes that it is his debt, but has not investigated it. He did not contact the credit 
reporting agencies or provide documentation regarding his disputes. (Tr. 51-52, 61) 
 
 Applicant does not recognize the credit card debts at allegations 1.e and 1.f., 
which total $2,545. He testified he tried to reach the creditor for allegation 1.e in the 
past, but he has not recently made contact with either creditor about these debts. (Tr. 
52-54) 
 
 
 
6  
 Applicant owes $312 for funds misappropriated after his check card was stolen, 
(allegation 1.h). He contacted the bank, and was told he is responsible for the debt, but 
has taken no action. He was unaware of the $99 debt to a book club, but when he 
called the creditor, he was told he owes it because it is in his name. He has taken no 
steps to resolve it. (Tr. 57-60, 113-114) 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant: deliberately falsified his security clearance 
applications in 1998 and 2010 about his illegal drug use; falsified his 2010 security 
clearance application about his use of an illegal drug while holding a security clearance; 
falsified his 2010 security clearance application by failing to list his alcohol-related 
arrests in 2003 and 2006; and engaged in conduct that resulted in his being terminated 
from employment in 1996 and in 2006. Applicant admitted these allegations. 
 
 When Applicant tried to join the Marines in 1998, he tested positive for marijuana. 
In 1999, he had a negative test, and was able to enlist. He testified that when he 
completed the security clearance application in 1998, his recruiter, who was aware of 
Applicant's drug history, told him to state he had used it once, and Applicant did so. He 
realized at the time that the true response was that he used it more than one time. (Tr. 
92-97) 
 
 Applicant testified that he never knew, while he was on active duty in the Marine 
Corps, that he held a security clearance. After his discharge, he remained in the inactive 
Marine reserve, subject to recall. In April 2003, he started working at a federal agency, 
and learned that he still held a security clearance. From 2003 to March 2004, he used 
marijuana. (GE 1; Tr. 97-102) 
 
 Applicant was terminated from employment twice, based on his conduct. In 1996, 
he stole items from a “big box” store and was terminated for breach of trust. In 2006, 
Applicant completed an employment application which asked if he had been charged 
with criminal conduct within the previous seven years. He answered “No,” failing to 
disclose four of the charges that fall within that period. Applicant testified that he 
misread the question and thought it asked for the previous ten years. He was 
terminated from his job for failing to disclose the information. (GE 1; Tr. 102-104) 
 
 On his security clearance application in 2010, Applicant did disclose alcohol 
arrests in 2002 and 2007, and cocaine possession in 2003. But he admitted in his 
Answer to the SOR that he deliberately failed to disclose his alcohol arrests in 2003 and 
2006, his marijuana use in 2003-2004, and his use of an illegal drug while he held a 
security clearance in 2003-2004. He testified that he was unsure why he did not list the 
arrests, that he was not paying attention when he failed to list his marijuana use, and he 
“read the questions wrong.” (GE 1; Tr. 104-107) 
 
Policies 
 
 
 
7  
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or his 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.6
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under Guideline J is that 
 
                                                     
3 Directive 6.3 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8  
Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
 Applicant was arrested seven times on criminal charges between 1996 and 2007. 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) 
and AG ¶ 31 (c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply. 
 
 Guideline J includes the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment, and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) does not provide mitigation. The last criminal conduct occurred in 
2007, approximately four years ago, and it is not recent. However, Applicant's 
falsification of his security clearance application in 2010 brings his criminal conduct 
closer to the present. In addition, nothing in the record evidence indicates that 
Applicant’s criminal conduct happened under unusual circumstances. Applicant’s 
numerous arrests cast doubt on his judgment and his willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Overall, his conduct casts doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 Applicant’s credibly testified about his dedication to his daughter, and his stable 
relationship with his fiancée. These facts are indicators of rehabilitation. However, 
Applicant provided false information to the Government in his 2010 application. At the 
hearing, Applicant stated he did not steal merchandise in 2000, but was simply covering 
for a friend who stole the merchandise. However, the video surveillance and the incident 
report show that it was Applicant who took the merchandise. His testimony at the 
hearing on this issue is not credible, and undermines a claim of rehabilitation. AG ¶ 
32(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
 
9  
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The SOR 
alleges more than $20,000 in debts. They have been accruing for several years, 
indicating that Applicant has been either unable to unwilling to resolve them. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control:  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was on notice that delinquent debts were a security concern when he 
completed his application almost two years ago. He was reminded that debts were a 
security concern when he met with an investigator in February 2010. Again, when he 
completed his response to DOHA interrogatories one year ago, he was reminded that 
delinquent debts are a concern. However, the debts in the SOR remain unpaid. With 
more than $20,000 in bad debt, Applicant's debts are both frequent and recent. His 
failure to take any steps to resolve them raises questions about his reliability and 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) mitigates financial problems that stem from unexpected events 
beyond an applicant's control. Here, Applicant experienced some periods of 
unemployment, and short-term contracting jobs. His current salary is modest. However, 
 
 
10  
to apply this mitigating condition, an applicant must show that he acted reasonably 
under the circumstances. The record contains no evidence that Applicant worked with 
creditors to obtain settlements, or with a credit counselor, that he established even 
modest payment plans, or made any substantial effort to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes several debts. However, it is his burden to notify the credit 
reporting agencies to investigate whether or not the debts are valid. The record contains 
no evidence that he contacted any credit reporting agencies. His financial situation is 
not under control. Moreover, his lack of action for almost two years, despite his 
awareness that his debts are a security issue, does not support a finding of good-faith 
efforts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to inform the Government of 
relevant information about his conduct when he completed security clearance 
applications in 1998 and 2010. The allegations implicate the following disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted that he deliberately falsified information he 
provided in his security clearance applications in 1998 and 2010, including his illegal 
marijuana use from 1994 to 1997, two alcohol-related offenses in 2003 and 2006; his 
 
 
11  
marijuana use in 2003-2004; and his use of marijuana while holding a security 
clearance. Applicant also admitted his terminations from employment in 1996 for breach 
of trust after he stole several items, and his termination in 2006 for failing to disclose his 
criminal past. AG ¶ 16(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
The record contains no indication that Applicant reported his falsifications to an 
appropriate authority, such as his security officer or supervisor, after completing either 
application. Applicant's actions are not in the distant past, as his most recent falsification 
occurred in 2010, less than two years ago. A decision to deliberately conceal 
information from the Government is not minor, and casts doubt on Applicant’s judgment 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17 (a) and (c) do not apply. Applicant has shown indications 
of rehabilitation: he is obviously dedicated to his daughter, and he has been working 
steadily for almost two years, and reports that his employers are pleased with his 
performance. However, the recency of his falsifications to the Government in 2010 
prevent full application of AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
12  
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate guidelines, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant expressed his intent to begin resolving his debts. However, a promise 
of future action is insufficient without some demonstration that the promise will be 
fulfilled. He has taken no steps to make payments or initiate payment plans for any of 
the SOR debts. Currently, his debts are unresolved, and Applicant has no plan in place 
to resolve them. 
 
 Some of Applicant’s criminal offenses occurred when he was young, starting at 
18 years of age. But it is disturbing that it continued until he was 28 years old. When he 
falsified his security application in 2010, he was a mature man of 31 years old. His 
falsification of the application in 2010 makes his criminal conduct recent. In 2010, he 
failed to disclose his complete police record, his 2003-2004 drug use, and his use while 
holding a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant testified that he did not become aware until late 2003 that he held a 
security clearance. But even if that were true, he used marijuana until March 2004, after 
he knew he held a security clearance. Applicant's involvement conduct involving trust 
issues has extended over a 15-year period, from the 1996 theft from the “big box” store, 
to the shoplifting in 2000, the theft of license plates in 2006, and the falsifications in 
2010. Finally, Applicant testified at the hearing that he did not shoplift in 2000, but the 
closed-circuit surveillance video shows that he did. Applicant was not forthright about 
this event, undermining the credibility of his hearing testimony.  
 
 Overall, Applicant has not demonstrated the trustworthiness and good judgment 
requisite in those who are granted access to classified information. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
13  
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.l  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.g  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a– 3.g  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
