 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02803 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on March 22, 2011. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I was assigned to the case on June 10, 2011. A 
notice of hearing was issued on August 2, 2011, setting the hearing for August 23, 
2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without any objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through H that were admitted into evidence without any 
objections. The record was left open for submission of additional evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted AE I through P that were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s transmittal letter and emails between the parties related to the 
post-hearing submissions are marked as HE II through V. On November 16, 2011, 
Applicant submitted one additional exhibit (AE Q) after the record closed, and I allowed 
its inclusion into the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 19, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer, he admitted all the Guideline F allegations, but denied 
deliberately falsifying his financial information in his security clearance application. The 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He is married and has four children, including one step-
child. He has worked as a station chief for a defense contractor since August 2009. He 
holds a master’s degree. He is a retired Air Force fighter pilot. He served in both Desert 
Storm and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) flying combat sorties. He was awarded three 
Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) decorations for his aerial actions during OIF. He also 
received the Purple Heart as a result of receiving wounds during the Khobar Towers 
bombing in 1996. He currently holds a clearance and has held a security clearance for 
20 years.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being delinquent on a 
mortgage loan of over $1,608,000, a charged off account for $96,181, a collection 
account for $104,000. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c); and (2) making false statements in response 
to security clearance application questions in December 2009 concerning his financial 
record (SOR ¶ 2.a). The debts are reflected in credit reports dated December 29, 2009, 
and February 8, 2011.2  
  
 In 2006 Applicant retired from the Air Force. He decided to move to an island 
location to begin his retirement life. In December 2006, he bought a 56 foot sailboat to 
live on. He paid about $155,000 for it and his monthly payments were about $1,200. He 
financed the boat through Bank K. While he was living in this location, he became 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 44, 47; GE 1; AE A.. 
 
2 GE 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
acquainted with a businessman who owned a shopping center and other real estate 
interests. The shopping center had 12 businesses located within it, which produced the 
revenue for the shopping center. Applicant decided to purchase the shopping center 
and become its property manager. The property was purchased in June 2007 by 
Applicant for over $14 million. Although the purchase agreement3 refers to a $2.8 million 
down payment by Applicant, he states he did not pay any down payment amount. He 
did secure a loan from a Bank (Bank B) to finance the purchase. There is no 
documentation for this loan in the record and it does not appear on any credit reports. 
He and his wife formed a limited partnership as the owners of the shopping center.4  
 
 Applicant also purchased a home from the same businessman who owned the 
shopping center. The financing of the home was tied into the financing for the shopping 
center. The home had mortgages in the amount of about $1.8 million. These are the 
debts reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. These loans were also received from Bank B.5  
 
 In early 2008, after purchasing the shopping center, Applicant began to feel like 
something was wrong with the transaction. He worked hard at filing the empty tenant 
locations in the shopping center and was using the rental income to meet all of his 
obligations. However, the recession hit in 2008 and 2009 which significantly affected     
the shopping center. Additionally, it appeared that several of the shopping center tenant 
leases had been fabricated. He believed that the seller of the shopping center and the 
appraiser colluded to arrive at an unreasonable value for the shopping center. He was 
not represented by his own attorney when he purchased the property. The seller’s 
attorney acted for both parties. In March 2009, Applicant received a report from an 
accountant hired to review the books of the shopping center. This report showed that 
the shopping center’s assets were overvalued and its liabilities were undervalued. 
Applicant continued to make his payments through the summer of 2009. Shortly 
thereafter, he received a letter from Bank B indicating that all future tenant payments 
would be made directly to Bank B. He hired an attorney in September or October of 
2009. His attorney has been negotiating with Bank B since October of 2009 to arrive at 
a settlement whereby Applicant would execute deeds in lieu of foreclosure and consent 
to confession of judgment on both the shopping center property and his residence and 
in return Bank B would not hold Applicant responsible for any deficiency judgments. 
This settlement has yet to be executed. The most recent correspondence from 
Applicant’s attorney on August 19, 2011, indicated that he planned to meet with the new 
bank manager after Labor Day. That meeting confirmed that, as of November 16, 2011, 
the bank was still willing to have Applicant execute a deed in lieu of foreclosure on the 
residence and the bank would dismiss the foreclosure action and waive any deficiency 
judgment. He also contacted the FBI about possible fraudulent practices by the sellers.6  
                                                          
3 The purchase agreement contains only the seller’s signature, See AE M. 
 
4 Tr. at 49-52, 78-79; GE 3; AE M. 
 
5 Tr. at 54, 118, GE 3-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 54, 56, 118- 121; AE C-D, Q. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In August 2009, Applicant sought a moratorium from Bank K for his sailboat 
payments. He was about to embark on a new job located overseas where he would be 
out of the United States for several weeks at a time. He believed he reached a verbal 
agreement with Bank K whereby it would place a 90-day payment moratorium on his 
sailboat payments. While he was overseas working his new job, the boat was 
repossessed for nonpayment and taken over by a collection company (SOR ¶ 1.b). He 
began making regular payments to the collection company on this debt beginning in 
August 2010 and has continued those payments through September 2011. Most 
payments were $250, but two payments were for $5,000 and $3,642. He intends to 
continue paying this debt until it is resolved.7 
  
 On December 13, 2009, Applicant completed his security clearance application. 
He answered “no” to the questions asking if he had defaulted on any loans or was 
currently 90 days delinquent on any loans. He did not intend to deceive the government 
about his finances at the time he filled out the application. His August 7, 2009, credit 
report shows no delinquent accounts. He believed the boat loan payments were under a 
moratorium and not past due. He was told by Bank B that while they negotiated the 
outcome for the shopping center property and his residence, the bank would not report 
these delinquencies. He filled out the application after just coming back from his 
overseas job and without the benefit of a recent credit report. He knew based upon his 
past experience in the Air Force that a credit check would be conducted. Based upon 
this knowledge, it would be foolish for him to attempt to deceive the government about 
his financial condition. He stated “no” to the questions because he believed those were 
the correct responses at the time. I find Applicant’s testimony credible.8   
   
 Applicant is current on all his other debts. He has borrowed some money from 
his father, but there is no time deadline for repayment. He owns a home in another state 
that is currently being rented. He rents a home in his state of residence. His current 
position requires him to be working overseas for six weeks, and then return home for six 
weeks on a continuous cycle. He recently received an advance from the publisher of a 
book he wrote about his combat missions in the Air Force.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 67-84; AE K, N. 
 
8 Tr. at 65-70, 125-126; GE 6. 
 
9 Tr. at 47, 139, 143-144; AE P. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his two home mortgages and had a sailboat 
repossessed for nonpayment. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individuals current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties were caused when he decided to purchase a 
shopping center as a business enterprise. Evidence supports his belief that this 
transaction may have involved fraud by the sellers. Nevertheless, Applicant purchased 
a residence with two mortgages that were tied to the shopping center transaction. 
Because of the recession and possible fraudulent leases, the shopping center failed in 
August 2009. Applicant was unable to pay his mortgages or a sailboat he purchased in 
2007. Although the debts are on-going, it is unlikely Applicant will be involved in a 
similar type of business in the future. His achievements as an Air Force fighter pilot 
support his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. 
The business downturn and the possible fraud by the sellers concerning the tenant 
 
7 
 
 
leases for the shopping center were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. He acted 
responsibly when he hired an accountant to examine the initial transaction, he hired an 
attorney to represent his interests in the foreclosure action, and he sought employment 
soon after the business collapse to take care of his family and pay his bills. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. There is recent correspondence indicating Bank B is willing to accept a 
settlement on the home mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c), relieving Applicant of all 
liability. He has also established a 14-month track record of repayment on the sailboat 
debt. He has not received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant’s 
efforts to reach a settlement with Bank B over the home mortgages and his repayment 
plan for the sailboat qualify as good-faith efforts to resolve the debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire. 
Applicant did not deliberately provide false information about his financial 
condition on his security clearance application. At the time Applicant filled out his 
application, he was unaware of the delinquent status of the debts. In August of 2009, he 
was told by representatives of both Bank B and Bank K that his loans would not be put 
into delinquency. He then went overseas with his new job. Upon returning in December 
2009, he filled out the application without the aid of a credit report. He completed the 
application with what he knew at the time. The government did not meet its burden to 
establish deliberate falsification. AG ¶¶ 16(a) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s outstanding 
and decorated service to his country. I also considered the circumstances by which he 
bought the shopping center property, which may have included fraud by the sellers. I 
considered the efforts he has made to resolve the shopping center matter along with his 
two home mortgages and his track record of repayment of the sailboat debt. Applicant’s 
evidence is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns in this case.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct,  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
