 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-03884
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s financial problems were the result of an economic downturn that caused
his commission based salary to suddenly and dramatically decrease. With the assistance
of his father, Applicant has now satisfied all his delinquent debt and resumed a financially
stable lifestyle. Clearance is granted.
On July 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on August 26, 2011. He
admitted both SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant waived the 15 day notice requirement on the record (Tr. 14).2
2
The case was assigned to me on September 30, 2011. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 5, 2011, scheduling the hearing for October 19, 2011.  The hearing was2
conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted five documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5 and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted three documentary exhibits that were marked as
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1-3 and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript
was received on November 3, 2011.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 41-year-old man who has been employed as a maintenance trades
helper by a federal contractor since November 2009. He also currently works part-time
delivering pizzas to supplement his income. Applicant was previously employed full-time
by the same pizza restaurant as a general manager from 2005 until 2009. His salary was
partly based on commissions, and, as the national economy underwent a substantial
downturn, Applicant’s salary decreased about $800 to $1,000 a month. As a result of the
decrease in his income, Applicant became delinquent on a number of accounts. 
Applicant submitted verification with his response to financial interrogatories, dated
May 24, 2001, that he had settled the majority of his delinquent accounts (GE 3). The SOR
listed two delinquent accounts that remained outstanding. Applicant submitted proof at the
hearing that those two accounts have now been satisfied (AE 1 and AE 2). Applicant’s
father provided him financial assistance in settling his delinquent accounts. Applicant’s
repayment agreement with his father is that Applicant will provide financial assistance to
his mother in the event that his father predeceases her. 
Applicant graduated high school in 1989. He served in the Air Force from March
1989 until August 1989. He was given an entry level separation from the Air Force.
Applicant has been married since May 1993. He has two children, ages 18 and 7, who
reside with him and his wife in a home that he has owned since 1998. 
Applicant’s credit reports disclose he lived a financially responsible lifestyle until his
income began to decline with the national economic downturn. He submitted a personal
financial statement that indicates he is currently living within his financial means. His wife
works outside the home and earns about $800 per month. Applicant has $200
automatically deducted from his salary each pay day that is deposited into a savings
account that he will not be able to access until it reaches a presently undetermined
balance. Neither Applicant nor his wife have any credit cards, and it is Applicant’s intention
to avoid reliance on credit to the maximum extent possible in the future.  
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id. at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
3
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of6
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant7
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant had a number of accounts that became delinquent. Those accounts
remained delinquent for a number of years until Applicant began to satisfy them after
obtaining employment with a federal contractor. The SOR lists two remaining delinquent
accounts that had not been satisfied when it was issued. Disqualifying Conditions (DC)
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting
financial obligations apply.
Applicant’s delinquent accounts were the result of a substantial decrease in his
income that coincided with a national economic downturn. With the assistance of his
father, Applicant has now resolved all his delinquent accounts. He no longer relies on
credit, and his testimony and personal financial statement indicate he is living a financially
stable and responsible lifestyle. He is having money automatically deducted from his pay
that is deposited directly into a savings account to avoid the recurrence of the events that
caused him to accumulate delinquent debt.
The following Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; MC 20(c): . . . there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial
considerations security concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his
ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
 
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

