                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06362 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana from around 1982 until July 2008. He used 
marijuana after he was granted a top secret security clearance in April 2007. Moreover, 
he deliberately falsified two security clearance applications (SCA), and made false 
statements to a government investigator. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted SCAs on August 7, 2006; July 8, 2008; and April 8, 2010. 
After reviewing the results of the latest background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On May 16, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 
9, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 29, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 5, 2011, 
convening a hearing on September 13, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 10. GEs 1 though 9 were admitted without objection. GE 10 is a demonstrative 
exhibit that was marked for identification, but not admitted. Applicant testified and 
presented exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 19, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old construction project manager working with a 
government contractor. He attended college from September 1985 until December 
1990, when he received his bachelor’s degree in construction management. He married 
his wife in March 2000, and he has a 29-year-old stepson and an 11-year-old son from 
this marriage.  
 
After college, Applicant worked for several construction contractors. He was hired 
by his current employer, a government contractor, in July 2006. Applicant is considered 
to be a valuable employee. He successfully managed several complex construction 
projects, and is currently managing five construction projects with an aggregate value of 
approximately $30 million. He demonstrates a strong sense of commitment, technical 
expertise, and managerial abilities. He is considered to be honest, trustworthy, and very 
reliable.  
 
Applicant started illegally using marijuana around 1982, while he was in high 
school. He estimated he smoked marijuana once or twice a week. He continued using 
marijuana during college. He estimated he consumed marijuana approximately 50 times 
between 1985 and 1990, around 10 times each year. From 1990 until 2002, when his 
son was born, he used marijuana every month. From 2002 until July 4, 2008, he used 
marijuana two to five times a year. He claimed his last use of marijuana was on the 4th 
of July 2008. He also purchased marijuana sporadically for his personal use. 
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA on August 7, 2006, because of his work with 
another government agency (Agency). He did not disclose in his 2006 SCA that he used 
marijuana from around 1982 until August 2006. In April 2007, the Agency granted him a 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AG, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). 
Because of his security clearance and SCI access, in April, May, and June 2007, he 
received documents and briefings that informed him of the Agency’s zero tolerance for 
illegal drug use.  
 
In July 2008, Applicant submitted a second SCA in which he again did not 
disclose that he illegally used marijuana from around 1982 until July 2008. In August 
2008, after a polygraph-assisted interview, Applicant disclosed he used marijuana from 
1986 until 1990, approximately 50 times. After further testing, he admitted using 
marijuana two times during 1998 to 2000. In November 2008, Applicant participated in a 
follow-up polygraph-assisted interview. This time he admitted he used marijuana since 
high school, and that his last use of marijuana was in July 2008, and occurred after he 
was granted a top secret security clearance in April 2007.  
 
Applicant provided several explanations for his failure to disclose his illegal drug 
use in his two SCAs and during several interviews. Although he knew that his use of 
marijuana was prohibited, he believed that it was acceptable because his use was 
“personal and private.” He also was concerned about the adverse impact his use of 
drugs would have on his ability to retain his job and to obtain a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s wife currently uses marijuana. In the past, she used marijuana with 
him, at the same frequency and rate he used marijuana. Applicant also currently has 
social contact with some of his marijuana-using friends who continue to smoke 
marijuana in front of him. He has not participated in any substance abuse counseling or 
treatment. (Tr. 61-62) 
 
Between 2008 and 2010, Applicant underwent five random drug tests, sponsored 
by his employer, which had negative results for drugs. Applicant testified he does not 
intend to use marijuana in the future. He is willing to submit himself to drug testing, as 
required, to show his commitment to abstain. He submitted a signed statement of intent 
not to use illegal drugs, with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant expressed regret for his misconduct. He loves his family and his job. He does 
not want his family to be adversely impacted by his actions. He believes that his 
excellent job performance, which included handling a substantial budget and managing 
large construction projects, shows he is honest, reliable, and trustworthy. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has authorized the Secretary of Defense to 
grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. Supreme Court 
has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in regulating access 
to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a 
security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AG are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana, with varying frequency, from around 1982 until 
July 2008. He used marijuana while working for Government contractors, and after he 
was granted a top secret security clearance with SCI access in April 2007. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;3  
 
(c) illegal drug possession; and  
 
(d) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s frequent, illegal 
marijuana use spans a period of approximately 26 years. He started using marijuana in 
high school, and his use extended until July 2008 (age 41). He used marijuana socially, 
and not under extraordinary circumstances. Applicant falsified his 2006 and 2008 SCAs 
and made a false statements to a Government investigator because he was afraid he 
would be considered not eligible for a security clearance, or his employment with a 
government contractor would be terminated. He knew that his use of drugs was illegal 
and specifically prohibited by his employer and the Agency. Notwithstanding, he used 
marijuana while working for a government contractor and after he was granted a top 
secret security clearance with SCI access in April 2007.  
 
Applicant believes his questionable behavior is mitigated by the passage of time 
because he last used drugs in July 2008, and his abstinence since demonstrates his 
intent not to abuse drugs in the future. He also submitted a signed statement of intent 
not to use illegal drugs with automatic revocation of clearance for any abuse of illegal 
drugs.  
 
Applicant’s actions are not sufficient to mitigate drug involvement concerns. He 
was made aware of the Government’s serious concerns about his illegal drug use and 
he failed to abstain. He presented no documentary evidence to show he participated in 
any counseling or aftercare treatment program. He presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis or prognosis concerning his illegal drug use. He continues to associate with 
his marijuana-using wife and friends. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s 
favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified his 2006 and 2008 SCAs when he failed to 
disclose he illegally used marijuana from around 1982 until at least July 2008. He also 
made false statements to a Government investigator concerning the period and extent 
of his drug use. He used marijuana while working with a government contractor, and 
after he was granted a top secret security clearance with SCI access in April 2007. 
 
  Applicant’s SCA falsifications, his false statement, and his use of marijuana while 
possessing a security clearance, trigger the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find that, for the same 
reasons discussed under Guideline H (incorporated herein), none of them apply to the 
facts of this case. Furthermore, Applicant made no effort to correct his falsifications until 
he was confronted several times during the security clearance process. His long-term 
use of marijuana and his three falsifications are serious offenses. His questionable 
behavior is likely to recur and it casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and judgment. He illegally smoked marijuana after he was warned several times about 
the Agency’s zero tolerance policy prohibiting the use of drugs, and while holding a top 
secret security clearance. He continues his association with drug-users. Thus, he is not 
taking steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
 
  SOR ¶ 1.d is decided for Applicant. It does not allege misconduct, only the 
consequences of his misconduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his job 
performance. He has good endorsements from his character references. He is 
considered to be a truthful, highly competent, and dependable worker. He stopped 
using illegal drugs in July 2008. He promised never to use illegal drugs again. These 
factors show responsibility, good judgment, and some mitigation. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, his 26 years of marijuana use which 
included drug use while working for a government contractor and possessing a top 
secret security clearance, his promise to not use illegal drugs in the future is not 
sufficient to show his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. Serious doubts remain 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Guideline E is 
decided against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c, and 
    1.e:       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
