 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02939 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in 
his background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and 
Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated May 31, 2011, to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. These actions were taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 6, 2011. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response. He denied one allegation 
(SOR 1.d) and admitted the other seven allegations. He provided detailed explanations 
for his answers and a document showing the completion of payment of arrears for child 
support. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 19, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 4, 
2011, scheduling a hearing for August 23, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
The Government offered five exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant testified on his 
behalf and offered one exhibit that I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A. I left the record open for Applicant to submit 
additional documents. Applicant timely submitted two documents which I marked and 
admitted to the record as App. Ex. B and C. Department Counsel had no objection to 
the admission of the documents. (Gov. Ex. 6, e-mail, dated September 8, 2011) DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 8, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 45 years old and has been a project manager for a defense 
contractor since March 2009. He married in 1998 and divorced in 2003. He married 
again in 2004 and is still married. He has four children. He served two years on active 
duty in the Army from January 1985 until March 1987. He has three years college credit. 
Applicant initially worked construction and his annual salary fluctuated from 
approximately $25,000 to $30,000. In later years, as a project manager in 2005 to 2007, 
his annual salary was approximately $55,000 to $60,000. His present annual salary with 
the defense contractor is now $85,000 or $7,085 monthly. His wife works for the same 
defense contractor and her yearly salary is $44,000. Their monthly expenses are 
approximately $6,500, leaving over $585 in discretionary fund from his salary only. (Tr. 
10-12, 22-25, 29-31; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated October 2, 2009) 
  
Applicant is highly regarded by his employer. He was initially employed as a 
construction manager. Through training and effort, he received certifications as a project 
manager and he now manages some of the most important projects for his employer. 
His performance is excellent and professional. His employer, who is also the facility 
security officer, believes Applicant to be an extraordinary individual who is trustworthy 
and reliable. (App. Ex. A, Letter, dated August 19, 2011) 
 
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 4, dated December 2, 2009, and Gov. Ex. 5, dated April 
4, 2011) and Applicant's response to an interrogatory (Gov. Ex. 2 and 3, dated May 18, 
2011) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a State tax lien from 2003 for 
 
3 
 
 
$2,209 (SOR 1.a); another State tax lien from the same State for $1,809 (SOR 1.b); a 
student loan account in collection for $14,285 (SOR 1.c); a $2,989 judgment in 2003 
filed by a State Department of Social Services for child support (SOR 1.d); a 2002 State 
tax lien from the same state for $1,670 (SOR 1.e); a judgment for $931 (SOR 1.f); a 
medical account in collection for $163 (SOR 1.g); and a utility debt in collection for $48 
(SOR 1.h). The total amount of the debt listed on the SOR is approximately $24,000. 
Most of the debt is from student loans. The tax liens and the Department of Social 
Services judgment are the same debts from past-due child support.  
 
When Applicant and his first wife divorced, he was ordered to pay monthly child 
support of $500. The support payments were later increased to $570. He and his first 
wife were awarded joint custody of their children. Applicant could not make his child 
support payments at times because of his student loan debts that were due. At other 
times, his wife refused his visitation rights, so in retaliation, he withheld child support 
payments. The State child service office entered a judgment and tax lien for the child 
support payments Applicant could not or would not pay. In addition, when his oldest son 
was injured in 2007, his former wife had let their medical insurance lapse. He had to pay 
a $12,000 medical bill which was added to the delinquent support payments. Applicant 
increased his monthly support payments to cover the delinquent account and paid most 
of the child support arrears. Applicant recently made a $5,000 payment to Child Support 
Services to complete the payments on the arrears. The judgment and tax liens at SOR 
1.a, SOR 1.b, SOR 1.d, and SOR 1.e have been released by the State. He is current 
with child support payments which he pays monthly by check to the State child support 
office. (Tr.17-20, 38-31; Response to SOR, Letter, dated June 16, 2011) 
 
Applicant used student loans to pay for his college education. The total amount 
of the loans still outstanding is approximately $28,000. Applicant made inconsistent 
payments on the loans until October 2009 when he started consistent payments. He 
now has a payroll deduction for student loans of $350 monthly. He is current with his 
payments. The debt listed on the credit report and at SOR 1.c is a duplicate of the 
student loans that he is paying as agreed. Applicant is working with the creditor and the 
credit reporting agency to have the loan listed correctly and the duplicate removed from 
his credit report. (Tr. 25-27)   
 
The debt at SOR 1.f is for furniture Applicant purchased for a friend. The friend 
was supposed to pay for the furniture but did not. Applicant tried to contact the creditor 
to make payment arrangements but learned the creditor is no longer in business and 
there is no means for him to pay the debt. He contacted the creditor reporting agency to 
have the debt removed from his credit report. The credit reporting agency 
acknowledged receipt of the dispute. The dispute has not been resolved. (Tr. 27; App. 
Ex. B, e-mail, dated September 6, 2011; App. Ex. C, e-mail, dated September 7, 2011) 
 
The debts at SOR 1.g and SOR 1.h are not Applicant’s debts. He contacted the 
creditors for both debts and determined that the debts belong to a person with his name 
but a different social security number and an address in another state. He disputed the 
debts with the credit reporting agency to have the debts removed from his credit report. 
 
4 
 
 
The credit reporting agency acknowledged receipt of the dispute, but has not yet 
resolved the dispute. (Tr. 27-29; App. Ex. B, e-mail, dated September 6, 2011; App. Ex. 
C, e-mail, dated September 7, 2011) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts established by credit reports and Applicant’s 
admissions raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates an inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt. 
Applicant's testimony concerning his finances was candid and forthright. He provided 
information concerning his efforts to resolve his financial obligations. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
These mitigating conditions have some application to Applicant’s financial situation. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt from child support payments he did not make when 
he was denied visitation rights by his former wife and when he could not afford to make 
the payments because of payment on other debts. When he was informed he had to 
make the payments even if denied visitation rights, he increased his monthly payments 
to cover arrears. These were not unusual circumstances or conditions beyond his 
control. But Applicant acted reasonably and responsibly towards his finances under the 
circumstances. He made the proper payment of the arrears and recently a one-time 
payment to satisfying the liens and judgment. He is now current with his child support 
payments. He is current with his student loans paying them by payroll deduction. He 
tried to pay another past-due obligation but the creditor is not known. The two remaining 
debts are not Applicant’s debts. Applicant and his wife have sufficient income and are 
 
6 
 
 
current with their present debts, and his finances are under control. He is not likely to 
incur additional debts since he is employed and living within his means. 
  
 I considered AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must 
be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith 
effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts 
is needed. Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual 
debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he paid each and every debt listed. All that is required is that 
Applicant demonstrates an established plan to resolve his financial problems and show 
he has taken significant actions to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant paid four of the SOR debts in full. He pays his student loans by payroll 
deduction and is current with his payments. He tried to make contact with one of his 
other creditors but the creditor is no longer in business and he cannot make payments 
on the debt. The remaining two debts are not his debts but belong to another individual 
with the same name but a different address and social security number. Applicant's 
payment of most of his debts and his efforts to pay the remaining debts provide 
significant and credible information to establish a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. His actions are reasonable and prudent under his financial circumstances and 
show honesty and an adherence to his financial duties and obligations. He established 
his good-faith efforts to repay his creditors and resolve debt. His reasonable and 
responsible efforts indicate that his past delinquent debts do not now reflect adversely 
on his trustworthiness, honesty, and good judgment.  
 
I also considered AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue). Applicant disputed the debt at SOR 1.f, SOR 1.g, and 
SOR 1.h. He has not been advised of the result of his disputes. He has mitigated 
security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s excellent 
performance of duty and his reputation for trustworthiness and reliability. Applicant 
established a "meaningful track record" of resolution or payment of his delinquent debts. 
He paid the four SOR allegations concerning his child support obligation and his child 
support obligation is current. His student loans are paid by payroll deduction and are 
current. Two other debts are not his debts and the remaining debt cannot be paid 
because the creditor is no longer in business. Applicant's actions to pay his past 
financial obligations and resolve his debts while maintaining a good current financial 
status indicate he will be concerned, responsible, and careful regarding classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated security concerns arising from financial considerations. He 
is granted access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
