Consisting of the transcript (Tr.) and Government exhibits (GE) 1-5.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-07922
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 21 June 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guidelines F,
Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the2
SOR, requesting a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 27 September 2011, and I
convened a hearing 2 November 2011. DOHA received the transcript 10 November
2011.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.b and 1.i. He is a 35-
year-old mail clerk employed by a defense contractor since 1996, although only recently
has his job come to require a security clearance. He has not previously held a
clearance. 
In his June 2009 clearance application (GE 1), Applicant failed to disclose any
history of financial problems. During an August 2009 subject interview (GE 2), Applicant
claimed that he omitted his financial history because the clearance application did not
ask for any financial information. He later claimed that he was unaware of the
delinquent accounts.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits confirm, 14 delinquent debts totaling
nearly $39,000; he admits two debts totaling $514. He claimed, without corroboration,
that he contacted the creditor for SOR debt 1.c (a $115 medical debt) the week before
the hearing and was to begin payments the week after the hearing. He also claimed that
he had not contacted the creditor for SOR debt 1.I ($399), but planned to begin
payments the week after the hearing.
Although Applicant denied the remaining debts, during his August 2009 subject
interview he acknowledged as his debts 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.I, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.n. SOR debts
1.g-h and 1.j-n are education loans Applicant took out in 2003. Applicant has made no
payments on these loans since 2007, although he believes that the Internal Revenue
Service seized his income tax refund for 2009 and applied it to his education loans. The
record does not show which of the loan accounts may be duplicates and Applicant
provided no clarification. SOR debt 1.e is for an automobile repossession. Applicant
claims to not recognize the debt.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to losing a part-time job in 1996, his
separation from his first wife in 2007 and subsequent divorce, and the death of his aunt
in 2007. SOR debt 1.f was a delinquent first mortgage on a house that has now been
foreclosed upon. SOR debt 1.c ($224) is a delinquent cable bill. Both of these debts are
joint obligations of Applicant and his ex-wife.
Applicant has not contacted any of the creditors holding his delinquent debt to
either confirm the debts or dispute them. Applicant submitted no character or work
references.
 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that7
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
3
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s debts go back several
years, and he has taken no action to address them.4
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and occurred under circumstances that
could recur.  While the debts arguably occurred under circumstances beyond his5
control, he has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts.  He has received no6
credit or financial counseling, nor has he demonstrated that his financial problems are
under control, or that he has a plan to bring them under control.  He has not made a7
¶ 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
¶ 16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel9
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification10
before being confronted with the facts;
4
good-faith effort to satisfy even the debts he acknowledges as his.  Accordingly, I8
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicants are expected to give full and
frank answers during the clearance process. Although Applicant failed to report any
financial problems, he was at least aware of his delinquent education loans. This
conduct constitutes a deliberate omission or evasiveness inconsistent with the candor
required of applicants.  9
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not disclose this adverse information
until his subject interview.  Applicant’s failure to disclose this information demonstrates10
a lack of candor required of cleared personnel, particularly with his background as a
Government security specialist. The Government has an interest in examining all
relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a clearance
decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse
information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
Government interests. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-n: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
