 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )   ADP Case No. 10-06514 
        ) 
Applicant for Position of Public Trust              ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns raised under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. Accordingly, his eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is granted. 
  
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) signed on 
June 8, 2009 to apply for a public trust position. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent 
with national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
  
On February 17, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); 
  
 
 
2 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on April 8, 2011, Applicant 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. He also denied the eight SOR 
allegations. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 20, 2011, and the 
case was assigned to me June 3, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 12, 
2011, for a hearing on July 26, 2011. The hearing date was continued because of a 
death in Applicant's family. A notice for the re-scheduled hearing was issued on August 
22, 2011. I convened the hearing on September 14, 2011. I admitted six Government 
Exhibits, identified as GE 1 through 6. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of 
two witnesses. He also offered 15 exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through O. DOHA received the transcript on September 22, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement 
of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old senior engineer. He married in 1990, and separated in 
1994.1
 
 He has one 19-year-old daughter. He has been in a committed relationship for 
the past 12 years. He spent a year in college, and then joined the Army. He served on 
active duty from 1991 to 1997, and was honorably discharged as a Specialist, pay 
grade E-4. He received several Certificates of Achievement and Army Achievement 
medals. He earned an associate’s degree in 2005. Since June 2009, Applicant has 
worked for a technology consulting firm, where he assists with accreditation of DoD 
information systems. He began as a junior security analyst and, in 2010, he passed the 
examination to became a Certified Information System Security Professional (CISSP). 
(GE 1; AE B, H; Tr. 23, 39, 42, 62-65) 
After Applicant left the Army in late 1997, he was unemployed for a few months. 
He found employment in March 1998. His mother had been paying his 1989-1990 
student loans, and he was unaware of any problem with them. He later learned that two 
loans were in default. In 1999, his gross pay was $35,000. About 25 percent of his net 
pay was garnished to pay the student loans, causing a significant decrease in funds 
available to pay for food, rent, and utilities. The used car he purchased needed 
extensive repairs. He returned the car and was told he did not owe anything further. 
However, that was untrue, and the account was sold to a collection agency. Applicant 
retained an attorney, who advised him to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. His 
petition listed no assets, and less than $15,000 in liabilities. It was successfully 
discharged in 2001. (GE 3; AE E, J; Tr. 69-78) 
                                                 
1 The evidence does not indicate if Applicant is divorced. 
 
 
3 
 In 2002, Applicant was laid off, and remained unemployed into 2003. He moved 
in with a friend, and lived on his unemployment compensation. He decided to return to 
college, and began school in 2003. He maintained a grade point average of 3.5 or 
higher during several semesters. His classes were paid through the G.I. Bill, personal 
loans, and student loans. His G.I. Bill payments continued a few months past the date 
when he withdrew from school in June 2005. He was billed for the overpayment 
(allegations 1.b and 1.c). (GE 3; AE H; Tr. 78-80) 
 
 For four years, between 2005 and 2009, Applicant was unemployed. He worked 
sporadically, contracting his services to companies. His income dropped substantially. 
He also had three or four credit cards in the 2005-2006 time period, which he admitted 
contributed to his financial problems. He did not obtain full-time steady employment until 
he began his current job in May 2009. (GE 3; Tr. 55-56) 
 
During the year and a half before the hearing, Applicant's mother suffered from 
cancer. Applicant spent funds for travel and accommodations to be with her. He also 
helped pay for her treatment and drugs. He testified he spent approximately $700 per 
month on her care. After her death in July 2011, he shared the funeral and headstone 
expenses with his sister. He continues to share the mortgage payments on his mother’s 
home with his sister. (Tr. 59-60, 90-91) 
 
Applicant's partner, a dental assistant, testified on Applicant's behalf. They have 
known each other since 1999, and lived together since about 2002. She testified that 
Applicant had problems in the past because of unemployment. However, he is now 
financially stable. She was unaware of his delinquencies. Her income contributes 
approximately 20 percent to their expenses. Their combined incomes are sufficient to 
meet their bills, which are being paid in a timely manner. (Tr. 20-32)  
 
 Applicant had never received financial training from his parents. He has taken a 
financial counseling course and learned a great deal, such as keeping track of even 
small expenses to determine total cost of living. He found the course “very eye-
opening.” He now has one credit card, with a low credit limit of $500. He maintains a 
checking account which, as of the hearing date, had a balance of almost $28,000. (AE 
F, G, I; Tr. 58-59)  
 
After earning his CISSP certificate, Applicant received a substantial raise. His 
current annual salary is $90,000. His credit report of November 2010 shows 13 
accounts in good standing. It shows substantially fewer delinquencies (three collection 
accounts) than his 2009 credit report (11 collection accounts). Applicant has paid two of 
the three collection account debts, and has a payment plan in place for the third. The 
debts listed on the SOR appear in his credit reports of August 2009, and May and 
November 2010. The status of the debts follows. (GE 4, 5, 6; Tr. 42) 
 
 
 
4 
Student loans, allegations 1.b, 1.c ($3,336) - PAID – Applicant used these student 
loans while he attended college between 2003 and 2005. He provided a letter from the 
lender showing that he paid $4,270 in September 2011, which satisfied both debts. (GE 
3, 5; AE I, K; Tr. 47-48) 
 
Student loan, allegation 1.d ($13,678) - PAYMENT PLAN – Applicant agrees this 
debts is his, but disputes the balance. He was using the G.I. Bill to pay for his schooling 
from 2003 to 2005. He received his associate’s degree in January 2005; however, he 
continued attending school until June 2005. The G.I. Bill should have covered the costs 
from February to June. However, when he was billed for an overpayment, it erroneously 
included the time from February to June 2005. He has tried to have this amount 
corrected for years, but without success. He estimates the correction will reduce the 
balance by $7,000. Between the May and November 2010 credit reports, he reduced 
the debt from $15,831 to $13,678. Although still awaiting correction of the error, he 
contacted the creditor and made an initial payment of $3,680 in September 2011. He 
also initiated a payment plan of $300 per month. (GE 5, 6; AE I, L; Tr. 48-50) 
 
Student loan, allegation 1.e ($15,340) - DELETED – Applicant disputed the validity of 
this account with the creditor. He provided documentation from the creditor stating that 
the account has been deleted from reports of the three credit reporting agencies. (GE 3; 
AE M; Tr. 50) 
 
Collection account, allegation 1.f ($664) - PAID – Applicant also disputed the validity 
of this debt. He paid the balance to a collection agency several years ago. Another 
collection company then bought the debt from the first agency. The second company 
provided a letter to Applicant stating that the account was “recalled and closed” on its 
system in October 2007. On November 1, 2007, the company also requested one of the 
credit reporting agencies to delete the account from Applicant's credit report. The 
account was not properly deleted by the credit agency. On September 8, 2011, the 
company again requested that it delete the account. (GE 3; AE N; Tr. 50-51) 
 
Cell phone, allegation 1.g ($382) – PAID. The account is approximately ten years old. 
Applicant paid it several years ago. He contacted the collection agency listed for the 
account, and the company provided a letter stating that the account is paid in full. (AE 
O; Tr. 51-52) 
 
Medical debt, allegation 1.h. ($42) – DISPUTED. Applicant denies that this debt is his, 
and contacted the creditor to dispute it. When he provided his identifying information, 
the creditor’s representative found his name with the debt, but with an address in 
another state, where Applicant has never lived. He provided the name and telephone 
number of the company spokesperson. He testified that she agreed it was not his 
account, but she was unable to provide written confirmation. (Tr. 52-54) 
 
 
 
5 
 The chief executive officer (CEO) of the company where Applicant works 
provided a character reference. He noted that his senior management team consistently 
cites Applicant as a top performer, “a person of integrity, trustworthiness, and a valued 
member of my organization.” He described an instance when Applicant approached him 
about a need for information technology equipment at a local disadvantaged school. 
Applicant asked the CEO to help, coordinated the company’s efforts, and ensured the 
completion of the project. The CEO noted that such action is a “significant indicator of 
his admirable character.” (AE C) 
 
 Applicant received a rating of 4 or 5 (excellent or clearly outstanding) in almost 
every category in his 2010 performance evaluation. His supervisor testified that since he 
started with the company, Applicant has demonstrated exceptional character, work 
ethic, and integrity. Applicant disclosed his financial struggles to his supervisor when he 
was completing his security clearance application. The supervisor has been checking 
on his progress in resolving his debts. He notes that Applicant persistently worked 
toward his certification as a CISSP, while struggling with his mother’s and his partner’s 
health issues. Applicant has received several salary increases based on his excellent 
performance. (AE B, D, H; Tr. 33-46). 
 
Policies 
 
Each trustworthiness decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2
 
 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition under any 
guideline does not determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against 
them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to 
sensitive information. 
 
A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national security3
                                                 
2 Regulation §C6.1.1.1. 
 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to sensitive information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).  
 
 
 
6 
to deny or revoke an applicant’s access to sensitive information. Additionally, the 
Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or 
mitigate the Government’s case. 
 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national security as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with national security” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.4
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶18 expresses the concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant accrued eight debts, with the bulk of the debt related to student loans. 
The record shows no evidence that his debts resulted from frivolous spending, drug or 
alcohol abuse, gambling, or other negative factors. The facts support application of two 
disqualifying conditions: AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG 
¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline includes factors at AG ¶20 that can 
mitigate disqualifying conditions. The following mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation], and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
                                                 
4 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, §2(b). 
 
 
7 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness did not stem from negligence toward his debts, but 
from events beyond his control. In 2002, he was laid off, and unemployed from 2002 to 
2003. He acted reasonably by moving in with a friend. After completing two years of 
schooling, he was unemployed and underemployed for four years, from 2005 to 2009. 
He also had unexpected travel and accommodation expenses when his mother 
became seriously ill, and he cared for her, and paid for her treatment and her 
medications. Mitigating condition AG ¶20 (b) applies.  
 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquencies. As of the 
hearing date, he had paid four of the seven debts in full. He disputed two others. One 
was for $15,340, and it has been deleted from his credit report. The one remaining 
debt still has a large balance. Between May and November 2010, he reduced this 
student loan from $15,831 to $13,678. He recently made a substantial additional 
payment of more than $3,600. He also established a payment plan of $300 per month. 
Applicant's debts are under control. He has completed financial counseling, which has 
helped him to learn how to better handle his finances. AG ¶20 (c) and (d) apply. 
 
Applicant disputed two SOR debts. He successfully disputed the largest SOR 
debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e., and provided evidence that it has been removed from his 
credit report. Applicant contacted the creditor as to the other disputed debt, allegation 
1.h, but received only a verbal acknowledgement that it is not his debt. AG ¶ 20 (e) 
applies in full to allegation 1.e, and in part to allegation 1.h. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
 
 
8 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant accrued significant debt, due in large part to his unemployment and 
underemployment for four years. His efforts to meet his family obligations despite his 
low income, demonstrate his reliability and maturity. His supervisor and CEO attest to 
his admirable character and integrity. Applicant has substantially reduced his one 
remaining SOR debt, and has a plan in place for the remaining balance. He has 
sufficient income and savings to meet his monthly payments on the debt.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
