                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09119 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs from 2000 until April-May 2008. She used drugs 
after she was granted a security clearance in February 2008. I find not enough time has 
passed to establish that Applicant’s use of drugs is unlikely to recur. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted the pending security clearance application (SCA) on April 7, 
2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators 
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On July 5, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 
2011, and she requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on August 16, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 
2011, convening a hearing on September 22, 2011. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented 
the testimony of one witness, and introduced exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
On August 10, 2011, the Government moved to amend the SOR by substituting 
the number “1999” with “2000” from SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.c; by striking SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.d, 
and 2.e; and by renumbering SOR ¶ “2.f” as “2.b.” Applicant did not object. I granted the 
amendment as requested, except that I did not renumber SOR ¶ 2.f. The Amendment to 
the Statement of Reasons was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the amended SOR. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, including her answer to the SOR and her demeanor and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old consultant employed by a defense contractor. She 
attended college from 2000 until 2004, when she received her bachelor’s degree. She 
completed her master’s degree in May 2005. Applicant has never been married, and 
she has no children.  
 
Applicant started illegally using marijuana around 2000, while she was in college. 
She estimated she smoked marijuana approximately five times during college. She 
smoked marijuana socially while visiting friends at their homes. After college, she did 
not use marijuana again until April-May 2008. On this occasion, she went to a four-day 
concert with a “good friend from college,” her friend’s husband, and some high school 
friends of her friend’s husband. While at the concert, she smoked marijuana twice and 
experimented with Ecstasy once. She claimed her last used any illegal drug was in 
April-May 2008.  
 
Applicant started working for a government contractor in January 2006. She 
submitted her first Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions on April 28, 2006. (GE 3) In 
that questionnaire, Applicant was asked whether in the last year she had used any 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
illegal drugs. She answered “No,” because she had not used any illegal drugs since she 
graduated from college in 2004.  
 
Applicant also was asked whether in the last seven years she had been arrested 
for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses. She answered “No,” and failed to 
disclose that in October 2001, she received a ticket for underage drinking. The charge 
was amended to a disorderly conduct charge, and she pled guilty to it. Her conviction 
was quickly expunged after she attended court-mandated counseling. Applicant 
explained she did not disclose her underage drinking charge, or the disorderly conduct 
conviction, because it was expunged from her record. Since it was expunged, she 
mistakenly believed she was not required to disclose it.  
 
On April 28, 2006, Applicant also submitted a Supplemental Questionnaire for 
Selected Positions in which she was asked whether “since the age of 16 or in the last 
seven years” she had used any illegal drugs. She answered “No,” and failed to disclose 
that she had illegally used marijuana from 2000 until 2004. Applicant credibly testified 
she misread the question and believed she was being asked again whether in the last 
year she had used an illegal substance. 
 
On December 18, 2007, Applicant submitted a Security Prescreen Questionnaire 
to her company’s security office. In that questionnaire, Applicant disclosed that in the 
last 10 years she had illegally used marijuana “very few times and not recently (not sure 
of the month/year).” On January 10, 2008, Applicant submitted her first SCA. On it, she 
disclosed that from November 2000 until May 2004, she illegally used marijuana 
approximately five times. She did not disclose her October 2001 ticket for underage 
drinking, or that she pled guilty to an amended charge of disorderly conduct. Applicant 
was granted a secret security clearance on February 28, 2008. 
 
On April 7, 2010, Applicant submitted the pending SCA requesting an upgrade of 
her secret security clearance. In her 2010 SCA, Applicant again disclosed her history of 
marijuana use from 2000 until May 2004. She further disclosed she illegally used 
marijuana (twice) and Ecstasy (once) in April-May 2008, after she was granted a secret 
security clearance in February 2008. She also disclosed that in October 2001, she was 
charged with underage drinking, convicted of the amended charge of disorderly 
conduct, and that her conviction was expunged. 
 
Applicant is considered to be a valuable employee. She was recently promoted 
to a management position and placed in charge of the supervision of two teams. She 
cares for the people she works with, and believes in the mission of her work project in 
support of U.S. government agencies. She is dedicated to her work, and would not do 
anything to put that at risk. She would never do anything to compromise the United 
States. She credibly testified that she misread the question about illegal use of drugs in 
the Supplemental Questionnaire for Selected Positions, and that her mistake led her to 
provide an incorrect answer.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant claimed that she no longer associates with her drug-using friends. Most 
of them are now married and in the process of raising a family. She believes her drug 
use was infrequent, that it happened under circumstances that are not likely to recur, 
and that her use is now temporarily remote. She currently has an important and 
demanding job with substantial responsibilities, and she is dedicated to her work. She 
has matured since her last use of illegal drugs. Additionally, she has been in a stable 
relationship with her live-in boyfriend since September 2008. He does not use or 
condone the use of illegal drugs. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant has social contact, at least once a month, with her 
“good friend from college” and her husband -- the same couple that invited Applicant to 
a four-day concert where they smoked marijuana and used Ecstasy in April-May 2008. 
She does not know whether they continue to use illegal drugs, but she has not seen 
them use any illegal drugs since 2008. She also has associated, although infrequently, 
with other members of the 2008 concert party. Since 2008, she met some of them at a 
wedding, and some of them came over to visit her. (Tr. 46) 
 
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs, although infrequently, from 2000 (age 18) until 
April-May 2008 (age 25). She used illegal drugs while working for a government 
contractor, and after she was granted a secret security clearance in February 2008. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;3  
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
(c) illegal drug possession; and  
 
(d) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s use of illegal 
drugs, although infrequent, spanned a period of approximately eight years. She started 
using drugs while she was in college (age 18), and her use extended until April-May 
2008 (age 26). She illegally used drugs socially, and not under extraordinary 
circumstances. She knew that her use of drugs was illegal, and that it would adversely 
affect her ability to hold her job and a security clearance. Notwithstanding, she illegally 
used drugs while working for a government contractor, and after she was granted a 
security clearance in February 2008.  
 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant believes her questionable behavior is mitigated by the passage of time 
because her use was sporadic, she last used marijuana and Ecstasy in April-May 2008, 
and her abstinence since demonstrates her intent not to abuse drugs in the future. 
Additionally, she believes her circumstances and lifestyle have changed. She is now a 
more mature person. She is dedicated to her demanding work and her boyfriend. She 
promised never to use illegal drugs ever again.  
 
Applicant’s actions are not sufficient to mitigate drug involvement concerns. She 
was charged with minor in possession of alcohol (convicted of disorderly conduct in 
2001), and she learned little from that experience. She continued her illegal use of 
marijuana during college. She was made aware of the Government’s serious concerns 
about her past illegal drug use four different times -- when she submitted her 2006 
Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions, and in the Supplemental Questionnaire for 
Selected Positions in April 2006, when she completed her employer’s Security 
Prescreen Questionnaire in 2007, and when she submitted her 2008 SCA. 
Notwithstanding, she illegally used marijuana and Ecstasy in April-May 2008, after she 
was granted a secret security clearance in February 2008. Applicant’s use of Ecstasy 
raises more serious security concerns. It is an escalation of her illegal marijuana use, 
and demonstrates an increased lack of judgment. Ecstasy is considered to be a more 
dangerous illegal drug than marijuana.  
 
In light of Applicant’s age, experience, the period she used drugs, her job 
responsibilities, and her possession of a security clearance at the time she used drugs, 
her promise not to use drugs without corroboration (e.g., clear evidence of lifestyle 
changes and disassociation from her drug-using friends) is not sufficient to show her use 
of drugs is unlikely to recur. Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find there has 
not been a sufficient period of abstinence or changed circumstances. Applicant 
continues her association with her drug-using friends. She failed to demonstrate a clear 
intent to not use illegal drugs in the future. Her past questionable behavior still casts 
doubt on her reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the law. Her 
favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant failed to disclose her October 2001 underage drinking charge and the 
resulting disorderly conduct conviction on both her 2006 Questionnaire for Public Trust 
 
8 
 
 
Positions and on her 2008 SCA. She also failed to disclose on her 2006 Supplemental 
Questionnaire for Selected Positions that she used marijuana from 2000 until 2004.  
 
  Applicant’s failure to disclose the above information, trigger the possible 
applicability of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
9 
 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶¶ 17(a), (c), (d), (e), and (f) apply. Applicant disclosed on her employer’s 
2006 Security Prescreen Questionnaire, on her 2008 SCA, and on her 2010 SCA that 
she illegally used marijuana from 2000 until 2004. Moreover, she disclosed on her 2010 
SCA that she used marijuana and Ecstasy in April-May 2008, after she was granted a 
secret security clearance in February 2008.  
 
  Applicant was aware that her use of drugs was illegal and that it would adversely 
affect her ability to hold a security clearance. Notwithstanding, she complied with her 
moral and legal obligation to be truthful and honest in her security clearance 
documents. Concerning her failure to disclose her 2001 underage drinking charge and 
resulting disorderly conduct conviction, after considering the evidence as a whole, and 
having observed her demeanor while testifying and evaluated her testimony, I find that 
her omissions were the result of an honest mistake.  
 
  In sum, I find that Applicant’s omissions were not deliberate or made with the 
intent to mislead the Government. She corrected her omissions before being confronted 
with the facts. As such, she also has taken steps to eliminate any possible vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Her omissions do not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant receives credit for correcting her omissions on 
subsequent security clearance documents. I find that she was truthful and forthcoming 
during the security clearance hearing. She stopped using illegal drugs in April-May 
2008, because she wants to develop a career. She has done well working for a 
government contractor and earned a promotion to a management position. She seems 
to be on the correct path to accomplish her rehabilitation.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, her eight years of sporadic illegal 
drug use, her drug use after she was made aware of the Government’s concerns about 
the use of illegal drugs, and her drug use after she was granted a secret security 
clearance, her promise to not use illegal drugs in the future does not hold much weight. 
Her misconduct demonstrates a serious lack of judgment and there has not been a 
sufficient passage of time to show her questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. At this 
time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s good judgment, 
trustworthiness, and her eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.c, & 2.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
