 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04278 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeffrey Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Steven A. Marczeski, Esq. 
 
 
November 8, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to five creditors in the approximate amount of $21,894. Applicant mitigated the 
Financial Considerations security concerns, because the debts were caused by 
unforeseen circumstances beyond his control, and he has acted responsibly with 
respect to his debts. He also has completed a number of financial management 
courses. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On, January 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 10, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 14, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on July 14, 2011, scheduling the hearing for August 10, 2011. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and called one witness. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional 
exhibits and on August 11, 2011, Applicant presented AE D. Department Counsel had 
no objections to AE D and it was admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on August 16, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.e. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant married in 
November 2008. He has one minor child, and is expecting the birth of his second child. 
His wife does not work because she provides child care. (GE 1; Tr. 24.) 
 
 Applicant served as an electronics technician (E-5) in the Navy from 1999 to April 
2007. He held a security clearance while serving in the Navy. After leaving the Navy, he 
was unable to find a traditional job. He opted to work for approximately seven to eight 
months in a fundraising position at his church. His income was dependent on the 
contributions he brought in during this time. He found himself unable to make ends meet 
and relied on credit cards to pay for his living expenses. In August 2007, Applicant 
decided to take advantage of the G.I. Bill and seek more education. He attended college 
from August 2007 through June 2008. He was unable to find employment while he was 
in school. In June 2008 he was hired by his current employer. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 19-30.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to five creditors in the 
approximate amount of $21,894. Applicant admits each of these debts. His credit 
reports reflect that each has been past due since approximately 2007. Applicant sought 
financial advice from an attorney in early 2011. He was advised the best option to 
address his financial delinquencies would be to file Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. (Answer; GE 
1-7; AE A; Tr. 26.)  
 
Applicant addressed each of the five debts listed on the SOR in his Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition filed July 9, 2011. Applicant listed assets totaling $14,266.72 and 
liabilities of $29,782.75 in this Chapter 7 petition. A Meeting of Creditors was held on 
August 11, 2011, and the deadline to Object to Debtor Discharge was set for October 
11, 2011. The debts have not yet been discharged. (AE A; AE D; Tr. 26, 33.) 
 
Applicant has actively worked to educate himself on financial matters to avoid 
future financial problems. He took the required financial counseling for filing the 
bankruptcy petition. He also has taken 12 to 13 courses using CDs and books prepared 
by an established financial counselor. Applicant and his wife listened to the CDs and 
 
3 
 
completed the financial workbooks for these courses at a rate of two to three hours per 
day for three to four months. They now maintain a household budget. Applicant testified 
and the credit reports confirm that Applicant has no new delinquent debt. He testified he 
has learned not to overextend himself. He now lives within his means. (Tr. 33-40.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified on Appellant’s behalf. He indicated that Applicant 
is “truthful,” “a man of integrity,” and “a valuable asset” due to his unique skills. 
Applicant earned the Navy Good Conduct Medal, two Navy and Marine Corps 
Achievement Medals, the Army Achievement Medal, and numerous citations during his 
military career. His performance evaluations reflect he either “exceeds expectations” or 
is “exceptional” in all categories. (AE B; AE C; Tr. 28-29, 44-51.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
4 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to satisfy debts owed to five creditors in the approximate 
amount of $21,894, as alleged on the SOR. These debts have been past due since 
2007. The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant meets significant mitigating factors for financial considerations. While 
his financial difficulties are recent, they occurred due to Applicant’s inability to secure 
profitable employment after separating from the Navy. Applicant went back to school in 
order to help him obtain a job. He now has a skills set that is in high demand with his 
employer. His financial difficulties occurred due to circumstances that were largely 
beyond his control and are unlikely to recur based on the demand for his talents. 
Further, his financial delinquencies do not establish recent poor judgment. Applicant has 
acted responsibly by incurring no further debts since he was hired in 2008. He was 
unable, however, to meet the current financial needs of his family on his salary and 
address his delinquent debts incurred during his under-employment and unemployment 
in 2007. He sought the advice of an attorney who advised him the best way to address 
his debts was to file for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. He has followed this attorney’s advice 
and is going through the bankruptcy proceeding now. Under the circumstances, he is 
acting responsibly. Further, he has received a significant amount of education on how to 
avoid future debt. With no new debts showing on Applicant’s credit report, it is clear that 
Applicant’s financial problem is under control. He has a small, but significant, amount of 
money left over after his monthly financial obligations are met. Moreover, bankruptcy is 
a legally viable option to discharge debt. While Applicant’s debts had not been 
discharge by the close of the record, he has been attempting to resolve his debts, in 
good faith, through this legally viable option. 
 
 Applicant has a distinguished history of acting with honor and valor. He can be 
trusted to monitor his finances closely and resolve his debts in the future. Applicant has 
acted responsibly by following the advice of his counsel and educating himself on how 
to avoid future debt. Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by his supervisor. He performs well at his job. His integrity and his 
military service record show Applicant is trustworthy.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
