 
 
1  
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 10-08840 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
criminal conduct and financial considerations. His request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(Standard Form 86) on June 10, 2010, to request a security clearance required as part 
of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
 
2  
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
 
 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
On May 16, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
citing security concerns focused on Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2
 
 In his SOR Answer, dated June 27, 2011, Applicant denied 3 of the 
12 allegations under Guideline F. He also denied three the five allegations under 
Guideline J.  
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 2, 2011. DOHA assigned 
the case to me on August 16, 2011, and issued a Notice of Hearing on August 30, 2011. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 21, 2011. At the hearing, I admitted 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified and offered three documents, 
which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. The transcript was received on 
September 28, 2011. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 At the close of evidence at the hearing, the Government moved to amend the 
SOR by withdrawing the five allegations under Guideline E. The Government’s motion is 
granted, and the SOR is so amended. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has also taken two 
years of college courses in business and criminal justice, but did not complete a degree. 
He is married, and has one two-year-old child, and a seven-year-old stepson. 
Applicant's wife has been employed intermittently since the birth of their child. She was 
about to start a position at a retail store soon after the hearing. Applicant was a 
department store supervisor from 2000 to 2006. He was unemployed for about five 
months in 2006 after he was terminated. He then worked as a mailroom clerk from 2006 
to 2009. He began his current position with a defense contractor in May 2009. He is an 
administrative support courier, and also assists with security during new-hire 
orientations. (GE 1; Tr. 20-23, 37, 43, 49-50, 60-62) 
 
                                                     
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which were implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 
2 to the Directive. 
 
 
 
3  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Between 2001 and 2007, Applicant was charged with the following criminal 
conduct.  
 
• 2001, Possession of Weapon on School Property, allegation 2.a – In 
February 2001, Applicant was 18 years old, and a senior in high school. He was 
involved in a dispute between his friends and another group of students. 
Following the dispute, police searched his car, and found mace, a bat, and a stun 
gun. He was suspended from school for 10 days, and later expelled. He was also 
charged with misdemeanor possession of weapon on school property. The case 
was withdrawn prior to trial, but Applicant was fined, and testified that he also 
performed 20 hours of community service. He continued his courses at the 
Young Adult Program and completed his high school education on time. (GE 2, 
5; Tr. 21-23, 56-57)  
 
• May 2006, Petit Larceny, allegations 2.b and 1.l – From 2000 to 2006, 
Applicant worked for a large department store. In March 2006, he was 23 years 
old and the lead supervisor. However, he was experiencing financial difficulties. 
He testified that he was “young and dumb” and “kind of desperate” for money, 
and made a bad decision. He created a false transaction for a returned item, 
applying a $500 to $700 credit on his own credit card. After admitting his action, 
he was arrested and charged with felony embezzlement. On September 6, 2006, 
Applicant was found guilty. Through a plea agreement, the charge was reduced 
to misdemeanor petit larceny. He paid restitution, and was sentenced to six 
months incarceration, with five months suspended. He served 15 days of the 
remaining 30 days in jail. (GE 1, 2, 5, 6; Tr. 45-48, 57-58) 
 
• August 2006, Profane/Threaten Public Airway, allegation 2.c – After arguing 
with his girlfriend (now his wife) at a shopping mall, Applicant left. His girlfriend 
called him, and they continued arguing over the telephone. Applicant believes he 
cursed at her during the argument. Later, his girlfriend contacted the police. 
Applicant was charged with using profane language over the telephone. During 
the hearing approximately one month later, his girlfriend declined to press 
charges. The charge was dismissed. (GE 2, 5, 6; Tr. 50-52, 56) 
 
• July 2007, Assault, allegation 2.d - Applicant and his girlfriend (now his wife) 
were arguing in his car. He testified that she started to break items, and he asked 
her to leave. She refused and called the police. Applicant told the Office of 
Personnel management (OPM) agent during his security interview that no 
physical violence was involved. However, Applicant was charged with assault. In 
August 2007, the case was nol pros (not prosecuted). (GE 2, 5; Tr. 52-54) 
 
• July 2007, Possession of Marijuana, allegation 2.e – Applicant was also 
charged with possession of marijuana on the same day as the assault charge, 
 
 
4  
above. Applicant testified that when the officer requested permission to search 
the car, “I told them yes because I didn't have anything in my car from my 
knowledge. And they searched my car and they found the marijuana in my car. I 
told them it wasn't mine because I didn't smoke at the time.” Applicant’s 
girlfriend also denied owning the bag of marijuana. In his security interview, 
Applicant stated it belonged to friends who had used his car. At the hearing, he 
testified that the marijuana belonged to his girlfriend (now his wife). It was nol 
pros (not prosecuted) in September 2007. He stated at his security interview that 
the charge was not prosecuted because of lack of evidence. (GE 1, 2, 5; Tr. 54-
55) 
 
Applicant described his marijuana use to the OPM agent as 10 to 15 times in the 
period 1999 to 2000. He used it with friends at parties, but never purchased or sold it. At 
the hearing, he testified that it occurred “several years ago,” before his incarceration. 
Drug use is not alleged in the SOR. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 55) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Other than a few months of unemployment after his incarceration, Applicant has 
been employed for the past 11 years. His debts, as listed in the SOR, total 
approximately $17,500. They appear in his credit reports of 2010 and 2011, as well as 
in the printouts regarding Applicant's judgments. His credit reports show that some date 
back to 2005. Applicant met with an investigator in July 2010 to discuss these debts, as 
part of his security investigation. He plans to retain a debt consolidator to help him 
resolve them. In addition, his wife was about to begin a retail job after the hearing, and 
Applicant plans to use that income to pay his delinquencies. (GE 1, 3, 4, 7; Tr. 38-41) 
 
 The status of his SOR debts follows. 
 
CREDIT CARDS  
1.a ($3,497) – The creditor filed a judgment against Applicant in May 2009 for payment 
of this credit card debt. Since August 2011, Applicant's salary has been garnished for 
$512 per month. He testified that he called the creditor and was told that he would learn 
if he owed further monies at a hearing that was to take place in November 2011. (Tr. 
33-35) 
 
1.c ($1,669) – A judgment was filed in January 2008 against Applicant for this account. 
Applicant has not made any payments on it. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
1.h ($6,847) and 1.i. ($324) -  Applicant has not paid the debt at allegation 1.h, or set 
up a payment plan. He testified he was “not paying close attention to my funds” and he 
did not have money to pay it because he was paying on a student loan. He was also 
concentrating on the payments to the credit card at 1.a and planned to do one debt at a 
time. He has not paid the debt at allegation 1.i. (Tr. 40-41) 
 
 
 
 
5  
RENT  
1.b ($1,100) – Applicant testified that he and his landlord disputed over the landlord’s 
failure to repair items in his apartment. Applicant stated, “it was a verbal eviction” and 
Applicant and his wife left. In September 2008, the landlord prevailed in a judgment 
against Applicant for $1,100, slightly less than one month’s rent. Applicant began $50 
payments, but his landlord demanded the full payment, which Applicant could not afford. 
The landlord returned to court, and Applicant testified the case was dismissed at that 
time by the judge because Applicant did not have the money to pay it. However, the 
document he provided lists the case was, “Dismissed – No Funds.” It appears the case 
was dismissed because the bank account that the court garnished had no funds in it. 
Applicant testified that he moved his account to another bank. However, there is no 
record evidence of when he moved his funds in relation to when the funds were to be 
garnished. The record also does not show that the case was dismissed on the merits, 
and the debt appears on Applicant's April 2011 credit report. (AE B; Tr. 27-30, 35-37) 
 
MEDICAL  
1d, 1e, 1f, 1g, 1k (five debts totaling $1,091) – Applicant has not investigated these 
debts or made any payments. He testified he did not have the funds to pay them. (Tr. 
37-40, 45) 
 
TUITION 
1.j ($3,045) –Applicant had two student loans. He paid one with help from his mother. 
However, this debt loan for online classes at a distant university remains unpaid. 
Applicant spoke with the lender, and was told the debt could be postponed if he 
returned to school. However, at this point, he does not intend to continue his schooling. 
(Tr. 42-44) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). 
 
                                                     
3 Directive 6.3 
 
 
 
6  
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or his 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.6
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under Guideline J is that 
 
Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
 Applicant was involved with the police on five separate occasions between 2001 
and 2007. The charges included larceny, possession of a weapon on school property, 
assault, and possession of marijuana. In some instances, the charges were dismissed 
or not prosecuted. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31 (c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted) apply. 
 
 Guideline J includes the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
                                                     
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) does not provide mitigation. The last criminal conduct occurred in 
2007, approximately four years ago, and it is not recent. However, nothing in the record 
evidence indicates that Applicant’s criminal conduct happened under unusual 
circumstances. Even though some charges were dismissed or not prosecuted, he was 
found guilty of larceny. His five arrests in six years cast doubt on his judgment, his 
reliability, and his willingness to abide by rules and regulations.  
 
 Applicant is now married, has two children, and is four years older than when he 
was last involved with the police. He also testified he has not smoked marijuana in 
years. These facts show rehabilitation. However, Applicant engaged in deliberate theft 
from his employer. In addition, the fact that marijuana was found in his car does not 
bode well, indicating that, at the least, he associates with people who use illegal drugs. 
These facts weigh against rehabilitation, and Applicant receives only partial credit under 
AG ¶ 32(d). 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant 
has accrued numerous debts over the past several years. The SOR alleges more than 
$17,000 in delinquent debt, indicated that Applicant has been either unable to unwilling 
to resolve them. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
8  
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant was on notice that delinquent debts were a security concern when he 
completed his application in June 2010. He was reminded that debts were a security 
concern when he met with an investigator the following month. Again, when he 
completed his response to DOHA interrogatories in March of this year, he was reminded 
that delinquent debts are a concern. However, he took no significant steps to address 
them. He testified that he has not made any payments on the SOR debts because he 
has not had funds available to pay these debts. However, he has done little to even 
begin the process of resolving his debts. He has not contacted the creditors about 
settlements, or about low-payment plans. Despite testifying that he plans to seek help 
from a debt consolidator, he has taken no documented steps in that direction. With 
more than $17,000 in delinquencies, Applicant's debts are both frequent and recent. His 
failure to take any steps to resolve them raises questions about his reliability and 
judgment. AG ¶ 20 a), (c), and (d) do not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) mitigates financial problems that stem from unexpected events 
beyond an applicant's control. Here, Applicant experienced one period of unemployment 
that lasted only a few months; other than that, he has worked for the past 11 years. 
Although the evidence does not include specifics about his income, he has likely earned 
a modest income at the administrative and retail jobs he has held. His wife has worked 
only intermittently since his child was born two years ago. However, to apply this 
mitigating condition, an applicant must show that he acted reasonably under the 
circumstances. The record contains no evidence that Applicant made any substantial 
effort to resolve his debts. He receives only limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
9  
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate guidelines, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant expressed his intent to begin resolving his debts. However, a promise 
of future action is insufficient without some demonstration that the promise will be 
fulfilled. He has taken no steps to initiate payment plans for any of the SOR debts. 
Currently, his debts are unresolved, and he has no plan in place to resolve them. 
 
 One of Applicant’s criminal offenses occurred when he was young, approximately 
18 years of age. However, two occurred five years later, when he was 23, and two when 
he was 24, only four years ago.  
 
 Most troubling is that fact that Applicant's most serious offense, for which he 
served a short amount of jail time, involved a lack of trustworthiness. He intentionally 
and fraudulently added $500 to $700 to his own credit card account. Applicant was a 
long-term employee. He violated the trust placed in him as a supervisor. Moreover, he 
engaged in criminal conduct because he was in financial straits. A central goal of the 
security clearance process is to deter access by those who are willing to use criminal 
methods to obtain funds because of financial pressures. 
 
 Overall, Applicant has not demonstrated the trustworthiness and good judgment 
requisite in those who are granted access to classified information. A fair and 
commonsense assessment of the available information shows Applicant has not 
satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.l  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.l  Against Applicant 
 
 
10  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
