 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
----------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-04160 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Darin Groteboer, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her first electronic Security Clearance Application on August 
24, 2009 (SF 86; e-QIP). On January 19, 2010, Applicant submitted her second e-QIP. 
On December 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 5, 2011. She answered 
the SOR in writing on January 19, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 14, 2011, 
and I received the case assignment on March 16, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on July 26, 2011, for a hearing on August 10, 2011. That hearing was cancelled 
 
2 
 
 
at the request of Applicant on August 9, 2011. The second hearing date was set by a 
Notice of Hearing issued on August 22, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on September 7, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through H, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 15, 
2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the year date in 
Subparagraph 2.a from “2010” to “2009.” (Tr. 8) Applicant and her counsel had no 
objection to the amendment. I granted the motion to amend. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations the SOR. 
Those admissions are incorporated in the findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 26 years old, married in 2010, and employed as a security guard by 
a defense contractor. Applicant’s job started on September 7, 2009. Her income from 
this job is about $40,000 annually. (Tr. 9-20, 45, 46, 51, 74; Exhibits 1 and 6) 
 
Applicant attended college from August 2003 to May 2007, when she graduated. 
She smoked marijuana from the fall of 2003 to October 2008. She ceased using it then. 
Applicant testified smoking marijuana made her sleepy and created unpleasant physical 
reactions in the later years of her use. Applicant smoked marijuana in college with 
friends at parties about every two or three months. She never smoked marijuana at 
work or before going to her job. Applicant does not plan on smoking marijuana in the 
future. She submitted a written statement to that effect and it was marked as an exhibit. 
Applicant has not used other illegal drugs. She never tested positive for illegal drugs in 
scheduled urinalysis tests at work. When Applicant smoked marijuana after her college 
graduation, it was with college friends. She never purchased, sold, or grew marijuana. 
Applicant does not associate with the people with whom she formerly smoked 
marijuana. (Tr. 23-31; Exhibits A, B, F-H) 
 
Applicant admits she falsified her answer to Question 23 on the two e-QIP forms 
in August 2009 and January 2010 when she denied using controlled substance, 
including marijuana, in the previous seven years, which would have included her college 
years. Applicant intended to falsify her answer because she was afraid she would lose 
her job if she admitted her past marijuana use. She falsified her answers because she 
thought no one would find out about it because it occurred when she was in college and 
she “had a chip on her shoulder.” (Tr. 32-43, 54-70, 82; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
 
3 
 
 
During the first investigative interview on February 8, 2010, she thought her use 
would eventually be discovered so she should disclose it at that time. The February 8, 
2010, interview with the government investigator was her first disclosure about her 
marijuana use. The investigator told Applicant he had a law enforcement report that 
showed a February 2008 “Quick Hire Automatic Disqualifier: Drug Violation – Use of 
marijuana during the last three years or extensively.” Applicant denied any knowledge of 
any arrest or conviction for marijuana involvement at any time after admitting to the 
investigator she did use marijuana in college. (Tr. 32-43, 54-70, 82; Exhibits 1-6) 
 
Applicant had a second security interview with a government investigator, a 
different person from the first interview, on February 26, 2010. She had two interviews 
because she completed two e-QIPs and the interviews were not coordinated. The first 
interview resulted from the August 2009 e-QIP for a secret clearance and the second 
interview followed the January 2010 e-QIP submission for a top secret clearance. She 
admitted to the second investigator her marijuana use as she did to the first investigator. 
That admission came after she answered the investigator’s question about whether her 
written answer to Question 23 on the e-QIP was negative to any controlled substance 
use. Applicant thought the investigator was asking to confirm what she physically wrote 
on the form, not that it was factually true. Applicant then proceeded to disclose to the 
second investigator what she told the first investigator. Applicant testified her 
falsification began to “weigh on” her conscience and created anxiety for her daily about 
whether she could retain her job. She stated getting older and married has made her 
more conscious of being trustworthy. (Tr. 32-43, 54-70, 82; Exhibits 1-6)  
 
Applicant told her supervisor about her previous marijuana use two weeks after 
the second government interview. Applicant’s supervisor also knows about the 
falsification of the Question 23 answers on the two e-QIP forms. According to Applicant, 
her supervisor considers the incidents to be in the past and have not affected her work 
performance. The hearing process has not affected Applicant’s duty performance. 
Applicant has never been reprimanded by her current employer. (Tr. 36-41)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor submitted a written statement, describing Applicant as 
“dependable and responsible.” Applicant has a professional attitude and demeanor 
when working. She never misses work or is tardy for her duty assignments. Another 
security agent submitted a statement describing Applicant as “capable, dependable and 
honest.” A third statement describes Applicant’s hard work ethic and dependability. 
Applicant was promoted at work based on her duty performance. The third writer 
described Applicant’s growing maturity and trustworthiness during the four years they 
have worked together. (Exhibits C-E) 
 
Applicant testified forthrightly and honestly about her past marijuana use. She 
candidly discussed the two falsifications and reasons why she made them on the e-
QIPs. Her contrite attitude was visibly sincere. Applicant submitted a written statement 
of intent that she will not use illegal drugs again. If she were to use them, she consented 
to the automatic revocation of her security clearance. The criminal record check did not 
reveal any arrests for convictions against Applicant. (Exhibits 5 and A)  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines, In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One disqualifying condition applies to the facts in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition).  
 
Applicant admitted using marijuana from the fall of 2003 to October 2008. This 
usage occurred every two or three months while Applicant attended college and then 
following her graduation. She smoked marijuana with her friends on these occasions.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two 
conditions might apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
6 
 
 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s last marijuana use was in October 2008, three years ago. She was in 
college when she used this controlled substance, an environment more conducive to 
social pressure to use illegal drugs. Her usage was only every two or three months at 
parties with friends. Applicant is no longer in college, but employed full-time at a good 
job in a different geographic location and has received strong recommendations from 
her supervisor. She is also married. Her marijuana use is unlikely to recur because of 
her maturing attitude. Her previous actions do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 26 (a) applies.  
 
 Applicant demonstrated her intent not to use marijuana or any illegal drugs in the 
future. She submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic clearance revocation 
for any future illegal drug use. Applicant testified she does not associate with persons 
who use illegal drugs. She is no longer in college, having graduated four years ago. Her 
abstinence has been three years. AG ¶ 26 (b) applies.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
7 
 
 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. One condition applies to Applicant: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted she falsified her answer to Question 23 on two e-QIP forms 
about her past marijuana use.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. One 
condition may apply:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Applicant falsified her answer on two SF 86 forms filed with the government 
regarding her collegiate era drug use. After answering the question from the two 
government investigators about whether her answers on the two e-QIPs were true and 
accurate, Applicant disclosed her past drug use to the two government investigators in 
February 2010. The first investigator confronted Applicant with information from the 
background criminal record report that she used marijuana in the past. Applicant denied 
any criminal involvement, but then discussed her marijuana use in college with that 
investigator on February 8, 2010.  
 
On February 26, 2010, Applicant repeated her disclosure about her marijuana 
use to the second investigator after acknowledging she physically wrote a negative 
answer to Question 23. She admitted she did not disclose the marijuana use on her two 
e-QIPSs because she feared losing her job if she admitted her college and post-
collegiate illegal drug use.  
 
Applicant had to be confronted by the first investigator about her past marijuana 
use before she finally acknowledged her previous marijuana use.  Applicant’s 
conscience bothered her and she thought it might be discovered eventually, so she 
finally realized the value of full disclosure. Disclosure to the investigators was a stress 
reliever for Applicant. She disclosed later after the interviews her past actions to her 
supervisor, who has not penalized her for them. She now is comfortable making 
disclosure to her colleagues.  
 
Applicant deliberately falsified her two e-QIP forms. She did not disclose her 
actions about her marijuana use before the government background interviews or at the 
start of the interviews before being asked any questions by the two government 
investigators. The positive step of full disclosure resulted from the government 
investigative interviews, not Applicant’s independent action. Applicant may not falsify 
information in the future, but she has not met her burden of proof on that issue based on 
her past behavior. AG ¶ 17 (d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s past behavior of repeated falsifications make her vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17 (e) does not apply. 
 
None of the other mitigating conditions apply based on the facts in the case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s marijuana use was in a 
college environment situation. However, it occurred over four years in a repeated 
pattern. It started in college and ended a year after graduation. The pattern of 
falsification on her two e-QIP forms is serious. The marijuana use followed by the 
falsification about it was deliberate and continuous. Therefore, it is serious misconduct. 
Applicant was 24 when she completed the e-QIP forms. She was an adult but one who 
still thought she could evade culpability for her past actions by falsifying answers on 
official government forms that required honesty and full-disclosure.  
 
The non-disclosures were done to protect Applicant’s ability to obtain and keep 
employment in her home area. She made disclosures to the government investigators 
after being confronted with information about past marijuana use. Applicant knew she 
was wrong in committing the falsifications,  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her Drug Involvement. Applicant 
has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns. I conclude the “whole-
person” concept against Applicant based on her repeated falsifications.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
