                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06372 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concerns. She has 
accumulated over $30,000 in bad debt and failed to establish that her financial problem 
is under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On March 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made 
a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The 
basis for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the 
security concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant’s response to 
the SOR was received by DOHA on May 31, 2011 (Answer). She admitted 13 of the 16 
debts alleged in the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On June 30, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. I originally 
scheduled the hearing for September 14, 2011 but, due to technical issues with the 
video teleconference, the hearing was rescheduled for October 27, 2011.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel also 
submitted a demonstrative aide setting forth each of the debts and their current status, 
which was marked and accepted without objection as Hearing Exhibit II. Applicant 
appeared at the hearing and testified on her own behalf. She did not offer any exhibits 
and I kept the record open until November 3, 2011, to provide her the opportunity to 
submit matters for my review. She did not submit any documents for my review. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on November 4, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She received her bachelor’s degree in 2002 and her 
master’s degree in literacy education in 2004. She is a single mother raising her three 
year old son. From about May 2002 to approximately November 2009, she worked as a 
substitute teacher with periods of unemployment and underemployment. She has been 
with her present employer, a government contractor, since November 2009.3  
  
 Applicant’s financial troubles began shortly after graduating from college when 
she started to accumulate a significant amount of credit card debt. At one point, she had 
eight separate credit cards. Applicant recognizes that her financial problem stems from 
“being completely irresponsible” with her finances.4 She admits 13 of the 16 debts 
alleged in the SOR that total approximately $31,000.5 (SOR, ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, 1.g – 1.j, 1.l – 
1.n, and 1.p).6 Two of these debts resulted in judgments with a combined amount of 
over $17,000. (SOR, ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). She recently made arrangements to satisfy one of 
these judgments, which has been outstanding since 2006.7 (SOR, ¶ 1.b). She has not 
made arrangements to satisfy the other debts listed in the SOR that she admits owing.8 
2 As a time management tool, I issued a prehearing order (Hearing Exhibit I) requiring the parties 
to serve one another and me their anticipated exhibits prior to the hearing. 
 
3 GE 1; Tr. at 24-28. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-23 and 44. 
 
5 Answer, Tr. at 30-45.  
 
6 Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.k, and 1.o, which together total about $7,000. These debts are 
reflected in her credit reports and, as to 1.f, she claims to have been paying the debt back as of the filing 
of her Answer (she subsequently stopped paying this debt back). Tr. at 32-33 and 35-37. As these debts 
do not change the ultimate conclusion in this case, I find in Applicant’s favor as to these debts. 
 
7 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
8 Tr. at 31-32. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant has not taken a financial counseling course and does not have a 
savings account. She claims to have reduced her monthly expenses and is working 5 to 
15 hours a week overtime to pay her bills, but has been late on her rent every other 
month or so over the past year. Her son’s father does not pay child support and is 
currently living with her. As he is unemployed, he stays at home with their child 
obviating the need and expense of day care. She does not have the money to satisfy 
her overdue creditors and hopes to pay off her debt in the next five years. She no longer 
has credit cards, but owes federal and state taxes from last year. She recently setup a 
payment plan with the taxing authorities to pay her overdue taxes. Her current credit 
report reflects additional bad debt.9 Applicant believes that bankruptcy may be her only 
recourse at this point.10 She testified as follows regarding her financial predicament:  
 
What I really want to do is look into filing bankruptcy because, at this point, 
I'm in way over my head. . . . I haven't paid these debts in years, and I 
don't have enough extra money, in my paychecks, to -- it would take me 
forever, at this point, to pay these people off. . . . I guess at this point, it is 
very overwhelming for me. So, you know, I kind of just need to -- I think 
that would be the best option, is to just look into bankruptcy. 
 
At this point, you know, I really just wanted to discuss, you know, my 
financial situation in the past. Now, currently I am, and I still struggle, I am 
not going to deny that. You know, I do still struggle but I am trying to, 
slowly but surely, make it better for myself, and for my son, you know, 
which is why I -- of course I would like the clearance. Also the clearance, 
at this point, is prohibiting me from getting any promotions of significant 
value at my job, which is another reason why I would like the clearance. 
But, you know, at this point I just need to kind of work on my financial 
situation and go from there.11 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
9 Applicant’s tax debt and the new delinquent debts reflected on her current credit report were not 
alleged in the SOR. However, as Applicant was on notice that her finances were at issue, I will consider 
this information in assessing the mitigation evidence and whole-person factors. ISCR Case No. 09-06770 
(App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2002); ISCR Case No. 01-07656 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2002). 
 
10 Tr. at 28-29, 45-54; GE 2; GE 3; GE 9. 
 
 
11 Tr. at 51-52 and 54-55. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $30,000 in bad 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
debt, including two judgments that go back several years, directly implicates this 
concern. It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness . . .  
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”12 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. At this point, Applicant has not put her 
financial house in order. She still does not pay her bills on time and continues to 
accumulate bad debt. Although periods of unemployment, underemployment, and lack 
of financial support from her son’s father all contributed to her financial situation, she 
failed to act responsibly under the circumstances. Her financial situation is primarily due 
12 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
to a long history of over spending and accumulation of a substantial amount of credit 
card debt, followed by defaults on her other financial obligations. She only recently 
contacted one of her overdue creditors to resolve a long-standing judgment, but has not 
taken a financial counseling course or otherwise demonstrated that her financial 
situation is under control. Applicant is clearly a hard worker and a devoted mother who 
will hopefully be able to resolve her past indebtedness in a responsible fashion in the 
future. However, at this juncture, she failed to meet her burden to mitigate the financial 
considerations concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).13 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant’s decision to enter the teaching field is admirable and 
speaks volumes as to her character. However, she failed to manage her finances in a 
responsible fashion in light of her decision to enter a profession that did not provide her 
with a consistent paycheck or a high wage. She has now secured a full-time job with a 
steady paycheck. She works a significant amount of overtime each week to pay her bills 
and provide for her son. As noted above, however, “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the 
national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Applicant has a large amount of unresolved bad debt and 
failed to dispel the significant security concern raised by the manner in which she has 
handled her financial affairs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e, 1.g – 1.j, 1.l – 1.n, and 1.p:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.k, and 1.o:         For Applicant 
 
13 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is therefore denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
