1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-08723
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq.  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
he has a history of financial troubles due to a combination of gambling losses, providing
financial support to adult members of his family (stepchildren), and his wife’s
unemployment. He is resolving his financial problems through an ongoing Chapter 13
bankruptcy case, in which he has made monthly payments since about July 2010.
Nevertheless, he gave a deliberately false answer in a December 2009 security
clearance application, in which he denied ever having experienced financial problems
due to gambling. The evidence shows that was not the case. Accordingly, as explained
below, this case is decided against Applicant due to his deliberately false statement. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Answer. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 4, 2011,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security
guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E for
personal conduct. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to another administrative judge on April 20, 2011, before it was assigned to
me June 10, 2011. The hearing took place August 2, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was
received August 17, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged a 2009 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case that
ended with a dismissal in 2010, and a 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case that is
ongoing. Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant gave a deliberately false
answer in response to a question about his financial record when he completed a
security clearance application in December 2009. In Applicant’s reply to the SOR, he
admitted the Guideline F allegations. He also admitted that he provided an incorrect
answer to the question concerning his financial record and gambling, but denied that his
answer was deliberately false. He further explained his answer as follows:
At the time I was addicted to gambling and unaware that my conditinon
could influence my ability to make correct decisions because I did not fully
understand the ways that the addiction could take control of my life and
cause me to answer incorrectly. I now know that had I not been influenced
by a state of mind that had me in total denial I would have answered the
question positively.2
His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact
are supported by substantial evidence.
 Tr. 19–36; Exhibits K–R. 3
 Exhibit A. 4
 Tr. 76–79. 5
 Exhibits 3 and 4. 6
 Exhibits 5, 6, F, G, H, and I. 7
3
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His employment
history includes honorable active duty service in the U.S. Air Force during 1978–1982.
He has since worked for a series of companies engaged in defense contracting. He has
worked as an electronics technician for his current employer since 2001. He has an
excellent employment record as verified by the testimony of his supervisor and multiple
letters of recommendation from colleagues.  He has held a security clearance since3
serving in the Air Force. 
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce. He married his current wife in 1999.
There are no minor children living in their household, although his wife’s adult children
have lived with them for substantial periods over the last several years.  During these4
periods, he was essentially the sole financial provider for the household, and this
circumstance created a financial and emotional strain on him. He believes this
circumstance was one of the reasons for his gambling, because he used it as an
escape to avoid thinking about his situation. He has not gambled since November 2010,
when he spent $32, and he has no intention to gamble in the future.  He attends5
meetings of Gamblers Anonymous, and he and his wife have participated in pastoral
counseling through their church. 
Applicant has a history of financial troubles, which he does not dispute. The
financial troubles are due to a combination of gambling losses, providing financial
support to adult stepchildren, and his wife’s unemployment. As a result, he filed for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 2009, a repayment plan was confirmed in July 2009, and
the case ended in dismissal in June 2010.  It appears the dismissal resulted from6
Applicant falling behind on his mortgage loan payments. His creditors included the IRS
for $6,805 in back taxes (listed on Schedule E) and 60 creditors for $33,506 in
unsecured debts (listed on Schedule F). Before the case was dismissed, Applicant paid
$7,980 per the plan, of which $3,541 was disbursed to creditors. After the dismissal,
Applicant filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in July 2010.  A 60-month7
repayment plan was confirmed by the court, and Applicant has been making the
scheduled monthly payments since July 2010. He is now making monthly payments of
$1,300. His creditors include the IRS for $6,805 in back taxes and 59 creditors for
$27,599 in unsecured debts (listed on Schedule F).
 Exhibit 1. 8
 Exhibit 1 (Question 26a).9
 Exhibit 1 (Question 26o).10
 Exhibit 2 (personal subject interview). 11
 Exhibit 2 (interrogatories). 12
 Id.13
4
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in December 2009.  In8
response to the relevant question  about his financial record, he fully disclosed his 20099
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, which was then ongoing. In response to the relevant
question  about his financial record and gambling–which asked have you ever10
experienced financial problems due to gambling–he answered in the negative. 
About three months later in March 2010, Applicant was interviewed as part of a
background investigation.  He explained that he decided to file for bankruptcy because11
he had previously overextended himself financially by using credit card cash advances
to gamble, buy groceries, buy gas, and pay for recurring monthly expenses, because he
was attempting to maintain monthly payments for back taxes owed to the IRS. During
the same interview, he disclosed that he was 60-days delinquent on his mortgage loan.
He explained that he was unable to make his December 2009 and January 2010
mortgage payments because he had gambled with and lost the money allocated for
those expenses. Notably, this took place during his initial Chapter 13 bankruptcy case.  
To obtain additional information, DOHA issued interrogatories to Applicant, to
which he replied in January 2011.  Applicant indicated that his mortgage loan was12
current and he was making the scheduled monthly payments. This is consistent with his
hearing testimony. Concerning the circumstances surrounding his bankruptcy, he
explained that he was borrowing money (the cash advances) to cover his gambling
losses and to stay current with his bills. He then fell behind on all his financial
obligations, and he concluded that bankruptcy was the only option to allow him to
remain in his house and prevent him from going deeper into debt. Concerning his denial
of ever having experienced financial problems due to gambling, he explained his answer
as follows:
It [gambling] is and can be a serious fault/personal problem when taken to
extremes. I was scared to admit it and know that it can seriously affect the
status of my clearance. I do not want to lose my clearance and not
gambling has been helping me to be a better person.13
In his hearing testimony, Applicant elaborated on his denial as follows:
 Tr. 88. 14
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to15
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.20
5
Being addicted, I didn’t feel - - I just didn’t want to answer it correctly at the
time. I can’t say I would - - from now, I would always answer that yes, I did
have a problem. But at the time, I was trying to hide from my problems.
But I know it’s not acceptable, but I didn’t want to jeopardize my
clearance, to be honest. But I know that I have, and I know that this is the
only way to bring it to light and to give it - - to let you people make the
decision you need to make.  14
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As15
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt16
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An17
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  18
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting19
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 23
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).24
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.25
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 26
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant27
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
6
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate21
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme22
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.23
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.24
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it25
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant26
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline27
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
 AG ¶ 18.  28
 AG ¶ 19(a).  29
 AG ¶ 19(c). 30
 AG ¶ 19(f). 31
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a32
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
7
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  28
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The two Chapter 13 bankruptcy cases, the most recent of which
is ongoing, raise security concerns because they indicate inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of29 30
Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. In
addition, Applicant’s gambling raises security concerns given that his financial problems
are linked to it.31
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;32
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 AG ¶¶ 15–17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 33
 AG ¶ 15. 34
 AG ¶ 16(a). 35
8
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have especially considered the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d). Taken
together, Applicant’s efforts to address his gambling, along with his track record of
payments to the ongoing Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, are sufficient to overcome and
mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. 
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be33
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  34
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if, for example, the person
genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or
genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issue is whether Applicant made a deliberately false statement when
answering a question about his financial record and gambling on his December 2009
security clearance application. Based on the evidence, to include his hearing testimony,
I am persuaded he made a deliberately false statement.  As I understand his position,35
Applicant contends that his denial was part of his gambling addiction that he had yet to
 Neither Department Counsel nor Applicant presented evidence (e.g., expert testimony) that Applicant was36
formally diagnosed by a qualified medical or mental-health provider as a pathological gambler, which is a
recognized impulse-control disorder under the DSM-IV-TR. All references to addiction in this decision are
based on Applicant’s description of his behavior. 
 AG ¶ 17(a)–(g). 37
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).38
9
fully confront, and therefore, his answer was not deliberately false.  Assuming for the36
sake of argument that this theory is valid or true, at best it is an extenuating
circumstance that helps explain his actions, and I have considered it as such.
Applicant’s answer to the gambling question was objectively false, and he knew it was
false at the time. He knew it was false because he was then involved in his initial
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, filed months earlier, which was brought about, in part, due
to his gambling. Given the evidence as a whole, I conclude that he gave a deliberately
false answer to the gambling question because he knew, based on his long experience
holding a security clearance, that a truthful answer would reflect poorly on him and
might prevent him from retaining a security clearance. He has admitted as much,
explaining that he answered the question incorrectly because he was concerned or
scared that a correct answer would jeopardize his clearance.   
In reaching these conclusions, I considered all the mitigating conditions under
Guideline E,  and none, individually or in combination, are sufficient to overcome and37
mitigate the security concerns. Indeed, making a deliberately false statement to the
federal government during the security clearance process is serious misconduct, and it
is not easily explained away, extenuated, or mitigated.  
 
To conclude, the evidence of Applicant’s deliberately false statement justifies
current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and
the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national
security. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered
if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence, to38
include his past military service and his many years as a security clearance holder.
Although these matters weigh in his favor, they are insufficient to overcome the security
concerns. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: For Applicant
10
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
