 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07016 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, 
but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 6, 2011, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On July 12, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
July 26, 2011, and it was received on September 22, 2011. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant provided additional information that was included in the record without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on October 13, 2011.  
 
Procedural Information 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR as follows:  
 
1. Strike subparagraphs 1.b., 1.c., and 1.d; and 
 
2. Add subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d to state the following: 
 
2.c. You and your spouse own and maintain a condo in Taiwan 
(Republic of China) valued at approximately $600,000. 
 
2.d. You and your spouse own and maintain a bank account in Taiwan 
(Republic of China) valued at approximately $190,000. 
   
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel submitted a formal Administrative Notice Request that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts relating to Taiwan.1 Applicant did not object.2
 
 I 
granted the request. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations, but denied 
they are security concerns. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since March 
2010. He was born in Taiwan. He married in 1981. He and his wife immigrated to 
Canada in 1982. He became a Canadian citizen in 1985. At some point, he moved to 
the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1997. His wife was born in 
                                                          
1 The Administrative Notice Request is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
2 Due to an oversight Applicant did not receive copies of the documents that were part of the 
Administrative Notice Request. He was sent the material on November 9, 2011 and was afforded an 
opportunity to object. He offered additional comments on November 18, 2011, but did not object to the 
documents. These documents are marked as HE II-V.  
 
3 
 
 
Taiwan and became a Canadian citizen and U.S. citizen, presumably at the same time 
as Applicant. There was insufficient evidence in the record to determine the dates. 
 
 In 2007, Applicant applied for a Taiwanese passport. He used the passport to 
travel to Taiwan and Australia. He used it for convenience. As part of Applicant’s 
background investigation conducted by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator, Applicant was interviewed on April 20, 2010. During the interview, 
Applicant admitted he maintained dual citizenship with Taiwan. He did so because it is 
the country of his birth, his wife’s relatives live there, and he was considering retiring in 
Taiwan. He understood that there are some benefits to being a Taiwanese citizen such 
as being part of the Taiwanese Universal Health System and Taiwanese travel groups 
receive special discounts. He was unaware of any obligations he may have to Taiwan 
and believed he would have to be a resident to access the health care system. He 
stated at his interview that he did feel some allegiance to Taiwan because it is his 
country of birth, but he did not believe he had a conflict of interest between Taiwan and 
the United States.3
 
  
 Applicant was required to participate in compulsory military service in Taiwan, 
which he did for two years, before he became a U.S. citizen. He has not performed any 
other service for the Taiwanese government. During his interview, Applicant was not 
willing to give up his Taiwanese citizenship. He was not sure of the process of 
renouncing citizenship or the consequences. He was willing to relinquish his Taiwanese 
passport, which he eventually did to his facilities security officer on September 27, 2011. 
The passport was destroyed.4
 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. He maintains contact with them. His father-in-law is retired from the 
Taiwanese military. He is a bank board member. The bank is not affiliated with the 
Taiwanese government. His mother-in-law is retired, but it is unknown what job she 
formerly held. In his OPM interview, Applicant indicated his brother-in-law is employed 
as a director for a bio-chemical institute which is operated by the government. In his 
answer to the SOR, he indicated that his brother-in-law worked in a bio-tech research 
institute in Taiwan. He stated he was unclear as to what the relationship the company 
had with the Taiwanese government. He indicated his brother-in-law is some type of 
scientist. Applicant indicated he speaks to his in-laws in Taiwan infrequently, maybe 
once a year. He last visited them in 2007. It is unknown how often his wife maintains 
contact with her family in Taiwan.  
 
 Applicant and his wife have a bank account in Taiwan that has approximately 
$190,000 in it. They maintain it for investment and for convenience.5
 
 
                                                          
3 Item 7. 
 
4 Item 7; Response to FORM. 
 
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant and his wife own a condominium in Taiwan valued at about $600,000. 
They own it for investment and convenience. Applicant indicated in his response to the 
FORM that he and his wife are planning to sell their condominium in the near future and 
deposit the profits in the United States.  
 
Applicant indicated that the condominium and bank account in Taiwan constitute 
about 30-40% of his total assets and it would be financially difficult if they were 
abandoned.6
 
 
 Applicant owns a retirement savings account in Canada. He owned the account 
because he lived and worked in Canada for more than six years. Due to the rules 
governing early withdrawal, it is not financially prudent to do so. It cannot be accessed 
without penalty until age 60.7
 
 
Taiwan8
 
 
 Taiwan is listed, along with seven other countries in the 2008 Annual Report to 
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, as being involved 
in criminal espionage and export control enforcement cases. Taiwan was also included 
in the 2000 version of that report, and it was noted that it was among the most active 
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information. The report also highlighted 
incidents wherein Taiwan engaged in attempts to acquire export-restricted products.  
 
 Taiwan has been involved in various cases involving illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology. The specific areas included: 
classified materials, laser gun aiming devices/sights, measuring probes controlled for 
nuclear non-proliferation and national security reasons, centrifugal pumps that are 
controlled for chemical and biological weapons and anti-terrorism reasons, missile 
components shipped to Iran by way of Taiwan, and numerous other areas of concern.  
 
 The People’s Republic of China’s (PRC) Ministry of State Security is the 
“preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China.” It maintains intelligence 
operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwan 
connections.  
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Item 7. 
 
7 Answer to SOR, Item 7.  During his interview with an OPM investigator Applicant indicated he 
maintained dual citizenship with Canada. He stated he was unclear whether his citizenship is current or 
still maintained. He stated he did not have much allegiance to Canada, except that his sister lived there. 
He stated he has not taken any steps to maintain his citizenship in Canada. He was willing to renounce 
his Canadian citizenship. I have not considered this information for disqualifying purposes, but have 
considered it in my “whole-person” analysis. 
 
8 All of the information about Taiwan is contained in the cited sources in the Administrative Notice.   
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern involving foreign preference: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable. 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen.   
 
After becoming a United States citizen, Applicant applied for and received a 
Taiwanese passport. He used the passport to travel to Taiwan and Australia. He stated 
in his OPM interview that he was unwilling to renounce his dual citizenship with Taiwan. 
I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply 
 
AG ¶11 describes conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is not based solely upon his parents’ citizenship or 
birth in Taiwan. After becoming a U.S. citizen, he applied for and obtained a Taiwanese 
passport. He used the passport to travel. This was an affirmative action to obtain 
 
7 
 
 
Taiwanese citizenship. AG ¶ 11(a) does not apply. In his OPM interview, Applicant was 
unwilling to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply. Applicant 
used his Taiwanese passport to travel. AG ¶ 11(c) does not apply. Applicant 
surrendered his passport to his security officer and it was destroyed. AG ¶ 11(e) 
applies.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend , or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
Applicant and his wife have a bank account with approximately $190,000 in 
Taiwan. They own a condominium in Taiwan worth about $600,000. Applicant’s wife’s 
 
8 
 
 
parents and brother are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant’s father-in-law is 
retired from the Taiwanese military. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
In Applicant’s interview and answer to the SOR, he indicated he has minimal 
contact with his wife’s family in Taiwan. However, there is insufficient evidence to 
determine how much contact his wife has with her family. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that the familial connections and the nature of the relationship Applicant has 
with his in-laws and his wife has with them, would make it unlikely that Applicant and his 
wife would be placed in a position of having to choose between their family interests 
and the interests of the United States.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government and its relationship with the United States is 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the foreign government or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. His father-in-law is retired from the Taiwanese military. Applicant 
did not provide information regarding his father-in-law’s pension. He did not provide any 
information regarding the type of job his mother-in-law held before she retired and 
whether she receives a pension. He indicated his brother-in-law works for a company 
that he believes may be related to the government.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Taiwan is a leader in conducting industrial espionage against the United States. 
Applicant and his wife maintain strong economic ties to Taiwan. In his OPM interview 
Applicant indicated he may retire to Taiwan. He also indicated he and his wife were 
going to sell their Taiwanese property in the future. No evidence was produced to show 
that that transaction has happened. Although Applicant’s passport was destroyed, he 
indicated during his OPM interview that he was unwilling to renounce his Taiwanese 
citizenship. I have insufficient information to conclude that Applicant’s relationship with 
Taiwan and his wife’s contact with her relatives are such that it is unlikely he would be 
placed in a position of having to choose between his economic and family interests and 
the interests of the United States.  
 
Applicant applied for a Taiwanese passport and maintained his Taiwanese 
passport until September 27, 2011. He maintained his dual citizenship with Taiwan until 
at least that time. In 2010, he was unwilling to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. I 
cannot conclude that there is no conflict of interest. Applicant failed to establish that his 
sense of loyalty or obligation to his foreign relatives and to the country of Taiwan is so 
minimal or that he has established such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties with the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) do not apply.  
 
Because I do not have evidence as to the contact and communications 
Applicant’s wife maintains with her family in Taiwan I cannot apply AG ¶ 8(c).  
 
Applicant estimated his assets in Taiwan to be about 30% to 40% of his total 
assets. Without additional information, I am unable to conclude that Applicant’s financial 
interests in Taiwan are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used to effectively 
influence, manipulate, or pressure him. Therefore, I find there is insufficient evidence to 
apply AG ¶ 8(f).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s wife has relatives in 
Taiwan. His father-in-law is retired from the Taiwanese military, and it is unclear if his 
brother-in-law works for a company with government ties. Applicant and his wife own 
property worth about $600,000 and have a bank account with about $190,000 in 
Taiwan. Applicant indicated he has minimal contact with his in-laws, but there was 
insufficient evidence regarding his wife’s contact with her relatives in Taiwan. Applicant 
applied for and became a dual citizen of Taiwan after he was a U.S. citizen. He used his 
Taiwanese passport after he became a U.S. citizen. He recently surrendered the 
passport and it was destroyed. In his statement to an OPM investigator in 2010, he was 
unwilling to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship and indicated he may retire there in the 
future. Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof. He failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to conclude that his personal and financial contacts with Taiwan are not a 
security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
