1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-02920
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of eight delinquent
accounts and failure to file federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 and 2009. To
date, all these matters remain unresolved, although he intends to seek relief via a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to overcome
the security concerns stemming from his problematic financial history. Accordingly, as
explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Applicant submitted two Answers to the SOR, the first dated January 5, 2011, the second dated March 18,2
2011. 
 Applicant was on terminal leave from the Air Force during this period, and he was in that status until his3
official retirement date in November 2007. As such, he received full pay and allowances during this period.
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on December 23,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar
to a complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  The case was2
assigned to another administrative judge on April 20, 2011. The case was reassigned to
me June 10, 2011. The hearing took place August 3, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was
received August 18, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged eight delinquent accounts and failure to file federal income tax
returns for tax years 2008 and 2009. In Applicant’s replies to the SOR, he accepted
responsibility for the debts and the tax returns. His admissions are accepted as findings
of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His employment
history includes honorable active duty service in the U.S. Air Force during 1987–2007,
when he retired as a technical sergeant (pay grade E-6). He worked as a security officer
for a private security company from April 2007 to August 2007.  He was unemployed3
from December 2007 to August 2008. He resumed employment in September 2008 as
a security officer for a private security company. He held that job until June 2009, when
he began his current job as a unit training monitor. 
Upon his retirement, Applicant planned to open a business running a mobile
coffee shop. He anticipated operating the business on a local military installation. He
obtained a loan for $80,000 to finance the business. The loan resulted in a second
mortgage on his house. He also used money that he had saved. Unexpectedly, he was
unable to secure a contract to operate on the local military installations and found
 Tr. 49. 4
 Tr. 64–70; 74–79. 5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Failure to file the 2010 federal income tax return was not alleged in the SOR. Accordingly, I considered it for7
the limited purposes of evaluating Applicant’s claim of extenuation, mitigation, or charged circumstances, and
when assessing the evidence under the whole-person concept. 
3
himself with a trailer, equipment, and supplies he had purchased for his coffee
business. He was soon unable to make timely payments on his mortgage loan, his
second mortgage loan, credit card bills, and recurring monthly expenses. Also during
this period, he encountered unforeseen expenses (for example, auto repairs, home
repairs, etc.), which made his situation more difficult. The result of these various
circumstances was Applicant was left living paycheck-to-paycheck.  In time, he lost his4
house to foreclosure in about December 2009. 
As alleged in the SOR, and established by Applicant’s admissions and the
documentary evidence, the eight delinquent debts consist of the following: (1) a $26
utility account placed for collection; (2) a $72 utility account placed for collection; (3) a
$54 medical account placed for collection; (4) a $12,051 credit card account placed for
collection; (5) a $11,535 credit card account that was charged off; (6) a past-due second
mortgage loan with a balance $79,583; (7) a $10,497 credit card account that was
charged off; and (8) a $365 charged-off account. All these debts remain unpaid and
unresolved.  5
He plans to address his indebtedness via a Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceeding,
which will allow him to repay creditors under a court-approved plan. He paid a $250 fee
to retain a law firm to represent him, but a petition has not yet been filed in bankruptcy
court. He has been considering a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case since sometime in 2009.6
Applicant has not filed federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 and 2009.
He attributes this failure to various complications, including difficulty getting work
performed by a tax preparer and a lack of documentation. He understands he does not
owe back taxes for these years, but has not yet filed the required returns. Likewise, he
has not filed a federal income tax return for tax year 2010.7
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
4
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant20
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  21
 AG ¶ 19(a).  22
 AG ¶ 19(c). 23
 AG ¶ 19(g). 24
5
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant19
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline20
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  21
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The eight delinquent accounts raise security concerns because
they indicate inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting22
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to23
establish these two disqualifying conditions. In addition, Applicant’s failure to file federal
income tax returns for two recent tax years is of concern.  Taken together, the multiple24
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a25
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 
6
delinquent accounts and failure to file federal tax returns show that Applicant’s financial
house is in serious disrepair.  
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;25
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have especially considered the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b), given the business
failure and other unexpected problems (to include underemployment and
unemployment) that Applicant encountered after his retirement from military service.
Nevertheless, none of the mitigating conditions, individually or in combination, are
sufficient to overcome and mitigate the security concerns. 
The evidence of Applicant’s financial problems justifies current doubts about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).26
7
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence
outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence, to include his 20 years of26
honorable military service. And I gave substantial weight to the business failure
experienced by Applicant as well as the other unexpected problems. These were
circumstances largely beyond his control that had a deleterious or adverse effect on his
financial situation. 
With that said, he has done little to help himself since beginning his full-time
employment for a federal contractor in June 2009. For example, although he has talked
about pursuing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case since 2009, a petition has not yet been
filed in bankruptcy court. At present, Applicant’s problematic financial history is wholly
unresolved and ongoing. That history is simply inconsistent with the standards that
apply to those who are granted access to classified information. Perhaps in the future
when Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay or resolve these debts, or there
are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control, he
can reapply for a security clearance with the sponsorship of an employer. But based on
the record before me, it is simply too soon to tell if or when Applicant will resolve his
financial problems. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.j: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
