  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06777 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dana D. Jacobson, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In March 2010, Applicant inadvertently left a firearm in his backpack when he 
went through airport security resulting in his arrest for possession of a weapon in a 
prohibited place, a third degree felony. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the criminal 
conduct security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 11, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
  
 On April 29, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
August 1, 2011, I was assigned the case. On August 12, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on August 29, 2011.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through J, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. On September 7, 2011, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegation in the SOR, 
and his admission is incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old manager who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 1990, and seeks to maintain a secret security clearance. (Tr. 54, 61)  
 
Applicant called no witnesses other than himself. He provided numerous 
certificates of completion and achievement. (Ex. B) Applicant is active in the community 
donating his time to the local school (Ex. D) and works extensively with the Boy Scouts 
(Ex. E). He is the father of Eagle Scouts. (Tr. 65) He has received certificates of 
appreciation from the United Way (Ex. F), been a blood donor since 2007 (Ex. G), and 
has received numerous work-related awards (Ex. H). Coworkers, associates, and 
friends refer to him as a role model possessing high levels of integrity, honesty, and 
industriousness. They indicate he is thoughtful, reliable, trustworthy, professional, 
mature, and responsible. (SOR Answer, Tr. 27) In August 2010, he earned his Master’s 
degree in management of technology. (Tr. 54)  
 
Applicant has a state concealed weapons permit allowing him to carry a gun. (Tr. 
56) He routinely carries a gun when he is making long road trips. (Tr. 70) He carries his 
pistol in his backpack, which he uses daily. (Tr. 56, 71) In March 2010, when his uncle 
was hospitalized, he made a number of five-and-a-half-hour trips from his home to his 
uncle’s home. He had failed to remove the gun from his backpack when he returned 
from the visits to his uncle. A week after retuning from visiting his uncle, he used the 
backpack when he was going on a business trip. (Tr. 71) At that time, he was making 
more than 20 business trips a year. (Tr. 69) The pistol was discovered at the airport 
when his backpack was screened as part of the airline boarding procedure. 
 
Applicant was arrested for possession of a weapon in a prohibited place. (Ex. 3) 
The following day, he notified his company security manager about his arrest. (Ex. 4, Tr. 
63) In January 2011, after court proceedings and having incurred more than $10,000 in 
 
2 
legal fees2 to contest the charge, the case was dismissed by the District Attorney (DA). 
(Ex. 5, Tr. 35, 78) The matter is closed. (Tr. 42)  
 
Applicant’s attorney in the criminal matter testified at the hearing. (Tr. 29 – 52) 
His attorney had ten-and-a-half years experience working for the Office of the United 
States Attorney in the state where the conduct occurred. (Tr. 32) The crime as charged 
requires the scienter elements of intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly possessing the 
weapon. (Tr. 19, 33) Applicant’s actions did not involve scienter, but were merely a 
mistake.  
 
The conduct is unlikely to recur. Applicant no longer carries a gun in his 
backpack. (Tr. 78) If he is going on a road trip with a gun, he takes the gun directly to 
the car and removes it promptly from the vehicle. (Tr. 78) He was aware of the airline 
procedure to ship guns because he did so in the past. (Tr. 82) Had he wanted to ship a 
gun the day of his arrest he could have declared it, properly packaged it, and 
surrendered it to airline personal for shipment to his destination. However, he had no 
intention of shipping the gun or having it with him that day. He did not know he had it 
with him when he went to the airport.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
2 This is the amount of legal fees incurred related to the arrest. The amount of additional legal fees 
incurred related to this security matter is unknown.  
 
3 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to 
criminal conduct, “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
In March 2010, Applicant had a gun in his backpack when he went 
through airport security. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) and AG ¶ 31(c) 
apply.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
4 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 When Applicant traveled to see his uncle, he put a gun in his backpack. He has a 
state concealed gun permit which permits him to do this. When he returned from the trip 
he failed to remove the gun from the backpack. A week later, when he took the 
backpack with him as he was going through airport security for a business trip, the gun 
was discovered. Applicant had forgotten the gun was in his backpack. Had he wanted to 
take the gun on the trip he could have followed airline procedures that allow him to ship 
the gun as checked luggage on the aircraft. He was aware of this procedure having 
previously done so.  
 
 When the gun was discovered, Applicant was arrested. The following day he 
informed his security officer of his arrest and the incident. A year later, have incurred 
more than $10,000 in legal fees, the charge was dismissed. The DA was in a position to 
know the full facts and circumstances surrounding the incident and the DA chose to 
dismiss the action. From all evidence concerning Applicant’s character, this incident 
was the result of his inadvertent failure to promptly remove the gun from his backpack 
when the trip ended. There was no intention to take this gun onto the aircraft.  
 
 The mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 32(a) apply. The event happened 
under unusual circumstances unlikely to recur. The mistake, though serious, does not 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Additionally, AG 
¶ 32(d) applies because there is a good employment record, extensive community 
involvement, remorse, and he had obtained his Master’s degree since the incident. This 
is the only incident of a criminal nature in Applicant’s past. There has been no 
recurrence of criminal activity.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
5 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant made a single though 
serious mistake when he failed to remove the gun from his backpack at the conclusion 
of his road trip to visit his uncle. There is no evidence he was intentionally attempting to 
take the gun on the aircraft. He forgot it was in his backpack. Had he remembered it 
was there before going to the airport, he would have saved himself more than $10,000 
in legal fees related to the arrest, other legal fees related to the security hearing 
resulting from that arrest, and a year-and-a-half of anguish caused by this incident.  
 
Applicant’s mistake in failing to remove the gun from the backpack was simply a 
mistake. It was not conduct that showed poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising from the criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
