                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08099 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs from 2003 until April 2010. He used drugs after he 
was granted a security clearance in August 2005. I find not enough time has passed to 
establish that Applicant’s use of drugs is unlikely to recur. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 30, 2010. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
On March 22, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the adjudicative 
 
1 
 
 
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
guidelines (AG).2 Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2011, and he elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated June 20, 2011, was provided to him by transmittal 
letter dated July 29, 2011. Applicant was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to 
the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. DOHA received his 
response to the FORM on September 30, 2011. The case was assigned to me on 
October 13, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, the Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.e by substituting the 
state where Applicant was arrested in 1999, to conform the SOR allegation to the 
evidence. Applicant did not object. I granted the amendment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, except for SOR ¶ 1.e, 
which he denied. In his answer to the FORM, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.e, as 
amended. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, including his answer to the SOR and his response to 
the FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old systems engineer manager employed by a defense 
contractor. He attended college from 1999 until 2003, when he received his bachelor’s 
degree. While in college, he worked part-time to finance his own education. He 
completed his master’s degree in December 2009. Applicant has never been married, 
and he has no children.  
 
Applicant started working for Government contractors in August 2004. He 
submitted his first SCA in September 2004, and was granted a security clearance at the 
secret level in March 2005. He was hired by his current employer, a Government 
contractor, in June 2009. In his current position, Applicant manages a staff of 17 
engineers who serve under his supervision. 
 
In his September 2004 SCA, Applicant disclosed that from August 1998 until 
December 2003, he illegally used marijuana approximately 30 times. He provided a 
sworn statement about his drug use to a Government investigator in January 2005. He 
also disclosed that in September 1998, he was convicted for being a minor in 
possession of alcohol. His driver’s license was suspended and he was required to 
perform community service. In January 1999, he was charged with possession of 
marijuana. He indicated the charge was dismissed. However, the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) criminal record shows he was convicted and sentenced to pay a 
$1,000 fine (suspended), to serve one year probation, and 90 days confinement 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
(suspended). He failed to disclose that in November 1996, he was charged with 
possession of alcohol as a minor. Apparently, he was only required to attend 
counseling. 
 
Applicant submitted the pending SCA in June 2010. He disclosed that he illegally 
used drugs from June 2003 until April 2010. He used cocaine approximately once a 
year at parties, concerts, or holiday celebrations. He bought cocaine twice from random, 
unknown people. The last time he used cocaine was in April 2010, at a party while on 
vacation. Applicant averred his use of cocaine was minimal. He did not like using 
cocaine because he did not feel in control of himself. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana from June 2003 until December 2008. From 
2004 until 2008, he used marijuana approximately once every two weeks at parties, 
concerts, or holiday celebrations. He bought marijuana approximately 10 times from 
random unknown people. From 2003 until 2004, he used marijuana “more occasionally 
at college parties.” He claimed his last use of marijuana was in December 2008. 
 
Applicant stated that he did not like the feeling he got from cocaine or marijuana 
and stopped using them. He expressed regret for his drug experimentation. He 
acknowledged that his use of drugs was illegal, and considered his decision to use 
drugs “stupid” and “immature.” He tried to stop his illegal use of drugs in 2005, but 
continued using drugs despite his intentions. He promised not to use illegal drugs in the 
future, and to be more responsible. He currently is focusing on his career, and saving 
money to purchase a home. He believes he is now more mature and responsible as a 
result of his promotion to manager. He no longer places himself in circumstances where 
the use of illegal drugs is possible. He does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the 
future and is willing to submit himself to drug testing, as required, to show his 
commitment to abstain. He submitted a signed statement of intent not to use illegal 
drugs, with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. (Answer to the FORM) 
 
Applicant claimed that in January 2011, he attended a one-hour Narcotics 
Anonymous (NA) class at a church. He stated he is attending NA to increase his 
awareness about drug use, to reinforce his commitment to remain drug abstinent, and 
to equip himself to do so. He believes that being candid and forthcoming in his SCA and 
during his background interview demonstrates his honesty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show he has 
participated in drug counseling or rehabilitation. He presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis or prognosis concerning his use of illegal drugs.  
 
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
 
4 
 
 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs, with varying frequency, from 1998 (age 19) until 
April 2010 (age 31). He purchased and used cocaine from 2003 until April 2010. He 
purchased and used marijuana from August 1998 until December 2008. He used illegal 
drugs while working for Government contractors, and after he was granted a security 
clearance in March 2005. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;3  
 
(c) illegal drug possession; and  
 
(d) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s use of illegal 
drugs, although with varying frequency, spanned a period of approximately 12 years, 
and his use was not infrequent. He started using drugs while he was in college (age 19), 
and his use extended until April 2010 (age 31). He illegally used drugs socially, and not 
under extraordinary circumstances. He knew that his use of drugs was illegal and that it 
would adversely affect his ability to hold his job and a security clearance. 
Notwithstanding, he illegally used drugs for many years while working for a Government 
contractor, and after he was granted a security clearance in March 2005.  
 
Applicant believes his questionable behavior is mitigated by the passage of time 
because he last used cocaine in April 2010, and marijuana in December 2008, and his 
abstinence since demonstrates his intent not to abuse drugs in the future. He also 
claimed he participated in a one-hour substance abuse church class and that he is 
attending NA. He submitted a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant’s actions are not sufficient to mitigate drug involvement concerns. He 
was convicted of possession of marijuana in 1999, and he learned nothing from that 
experience. He submitted his first SCA in September 2004, and was made aware of the 
Government’s serious concerns about his past illegal drug use when he was interviewed 
by a Government investigator in January 2005. He then promised to remain drug 
abstinent and, even though he tried, he failed to do so.   
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show he participated in any 
counseling or aftercare treatment program. He presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis or prognosis concerning his illegal drug use. In light of Applicant’s age, 
experience, the period he used drugs, his job responsibilities, his possession of a 
security clearance, and his recent history of illegal drug use, his promise not to use 
drugs without corroboration (e.g., clear evidence of lifestyle changes, statements from 
those who know him about his disassociation from his drug-using friends, or a 
 
7 
 
 
competent medical diagnosis and prognosis) is not sufficient to show his use of drugs is 
unlikely to recur. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find there has not been a sufficient 
period of abstinence. Applicant’s past questionable behavior still casts doubt on his 
reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the law. His favorable 
evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant receives credit for being truthful and forthcoming during 
the security clearance process. He stopped using illegal drugs in April 2010, because 
he wants to develop a career. He has done well working for Government contractors 
and earned a promotion to a management position. He seems to be on the correct path 
to accomplish his rehabilitation.  
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, his 12 years of illegal drug use, and 
the recency of his last drug use, his promise to not use illegal drugs in the future without 
corroboration is not sufficient to show his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. At 
this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
