 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09734 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Marvin Liss, Esquire. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On July 13, 201, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 23, 201, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 6, 2011. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 20, 201. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 7, 2011. Due to the unavailability of Applicant’s attorney, the case was 
postponed until November 8, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibit 
(AE) A, which was admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 14, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i. I have 
incorporated his admissions into my findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He earned his bachelor’s degree in 1990 and has taken 
some post-graduate courses. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2001. There were no 
children from the marriage. He has eight-year-old twins from a relationship. He has 
shared custody of the children with their mother. She has primary custody. He remarried 
in May 2011. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2003, without incident.1
 
 
 Applicant lived with the mother of his children and they shared a residence until 
approximately 2005 when he moved out. Applicant and the mother owned the house 
jointly. She remained in the house but was not willing to help pay the mortgage. 
Applicant continued to make the $2,900 monthly payments, but also had to pay his 
living expenses. He used some of his savings to make the mortgage payments. In 
addition to his own car payments, he was also paying $700 monthly payments for the 
lease on the mother’s car because she needed the transportation for the children. The 
mother agreed to buy out Applicant’s interest in the house, and in late 2005 provided 
him $40,000 to cover the equity he had in the house. Applicant used approximately 
$34,000 for a down payment on a preconstruction condominium. It was to be ready in 
the middle of 2006. It was delayed and was not completed and delivered until 2007.2
 
 
 From July 2004 to September 2005 Applicant was living with a friend and helped 
pay expenses, but did not pay rent. In September 2005, he leased an apartment, and 
his rent and utilities were about $2,000. The apartment was unfurnished and he had to 
buy furniture and other household items. He needed an appropriate home for his 
children to visit. Applicant remained in this apartment until February 2006 when he 
moved back in with his friend. He did not pay rent.3
 
  
 Applicant was not paying child support from about September 2005 to January 
2006. He was paying the $2,900 mortgage payment where his children were living until 
he was bought out. In January 2006, Applicant was ordered to pay $1,700 a month for 
child support. In June 2006, Applicant returned the mother’s leased car, and the 
                                                          
1 Tr. 37-40, 156. 
 
2 Tr. 41, 46-55, 59-62. 
 
3 Tr. 58-79. 
 
3 
 
 
mileage was over the limit. He owed an extra $5,000 for the car. He rolled the amount 
owed into a new leased car for himself.4
 
 
 In February 2006, Applicant was required to pay additional fees for the price 
increases and upgrades on the condo he had paid a down payment for that was still 
being constructed. He continued to meet his monthly expenses and did not accumulate 
delinquent debts. When the condo was nearing completion, by the terms of the contract, 
he was required to apply for a mortgage. At this point, the real estate market was 
declining. The purchase price of the condo was about $660,000. He looked into getting 
out of the contract, but if Applicant withdrew from the contract he would lose his down 
payment and other money he already paid, and he would be responsible for the 
deficiency of what he had agreed to pay and the amount it eventually sold for. He went 
through with the contract and completed the sale in January 2007. He was required to 
pay additional money for closing and other settlement fees. He estimated the amount to 
be about $31,000. His mortgage was for $590,000. He had to obtain two mortgages so 
he would not have to pay mortgage insurance because of the amount of the loan. His 
combined mortgage payment was $4,400. He also was required to pay $650 in monthly 
condo fees. Appellant’s parents gave him $15,000 to help pay the fees. He needed to 
buy additional furnishings for the children’s room. He obtained a home equity loan which 
replaced the $120,000 second mortgage. The home equity loan was for $168,000. He 
used the additional money to satisfy some credit card debt and pay for a car lease. At 
this point, Applicant was still able to meet his obligations.5
 
 
 In 2008, Applicant’s cousin asked him for financial assistance. His cousin had 
lost his job, and he had a family with six children. Applicant agreed to sign a lease in his 
name for a single family rental home. His cousin was to pay Applicant the rent and then 
Applicant would pay the landlord. The amount of the rent was $1,350. He made sure his 
cousin understood that Applicant had other financial obligations, and he needed his 
cousin to pay the rent. His cousin paid the rent for three or four months and then 
stopped. Applicant spoke to his cousin, but to no avail. Applicant maintained the 
payments so he would not default on the lease. He contacted the landlord, but was 
unable to negotiate an agreement. Applicant paid the rent throughout the terms of the 
lease until the landlord forgave the last month’s rent. His cousin remained in the house, 
but failed to pay the rent or move. Applicant threatened legal action to remove his 
cousin from the premises. This event severely affected Applicant’s finances.6
 
  
 Applicant and his girlfriend had been living together at the condo since January 
2007. She had been contributing about $300-$500 toward expenses. She became 
upset about his cousin and how Applicant was handling the situation, so she decided to 
move out in December 2008. Applicant had been helping her with her car payments 
which were $1,000 a month. He provided her about $800 a month during 2008 until 
                                                          
4 Tr. 43-55. 
 
5 Tr. 74, 79-93, 128-129. 
 
6 Tr. 93-99, 105. 
 
4 
 
 
about February or March 2009. He was hoping to reconcile with her, which they 
eventually did and married.7
 
  
 Applicant used his $20,000 tax refund he received in March or April 2008 for an 
investment. The investment scheme was fraudulent and Applicant secured a judgment 
against the perpetrator. The judgment has not been satisfied. Applicant lost the 
$20,000.8 Applicant secured a $20,000 signature loan to help pay his debts.9
 
  
 In 2008, Applicant decided to pursue a real estate license. He bought educational 
material and took classes. He financed this endeavor with credit cards. It did not come 
to fruition.10
 
 
 With all of the events that took place, Applicant had difficulty paying his mortgage 
and other debts. Realizing his debts were becoming overwhelming, he sought legal 
advice and decided in May 2010 to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His plan was 
approved, which calls for the full satisfaction of arrearages on the first mortgage on his 
condo (SOR ¶1.j). Because the condo is worth less than his mortgage the law provides 
for the overage to be written off, subject to Applicant completing the Chapter 13 plan. 
That means the second mortgage, that is a home equity loan, is removed from the 
condo. Its removal is subject to Applicant successfully completing the Chapter 13 plan. 
This is the debt in SOR ¶1.k. If the plan is dismissed or changed to a Chapter 7, 
Applicant will be liable for the home equity debt. Applicant is paying, through the 
bankruptcy trustee, those creditors who filed a proof of claim. The creditor in SOR ¶1.c 
failed to file a timely claim and the trustee dismissed it. Applicant is no longer legally 
responsible for this debt.11
 
  
 Applicant has a 60-month payment plan. During the first five months he was 
required to pay $1,250.89. After that he is required to pay $2,000 a month for 55 
months. All payments are made to the trustee and the trustee distributes the payments 
to the creditors who filed claims. Applicant attempted to contact the creditor in SOR ¶1.i 
but never received a response. The debt in SOR ¶1.e ($37) was paid in May 2011. The 
remaining debts alleged in the SOR are part of the Chapter 13 plan, except the debt in 
SOR ¶1.c for which the creditor did not file a timely claim.12
 
 
  
                                                          
7 Tr. 99-105. 
 
8 Tr. 107-111; GE 5. 
 
9 Tr. 106. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Tr. 40; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. 112-124. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s girlfriend moved back in with him and they were married in May 2011. 
Since filing for bankruptcy, Applicant has not incurred any additional credit card or 
delinquent debts. He and his wife maintain separate accounts and she contributes 
about $1,000 toward the household expenses. She also has a part-time job. Applicant 
admitted he owed the other consumer debts on the SOR. Some of them were for cash 
advances so he could pay his bills.13
 
  
 Applicant made numerous attempts to modify his mortgage loan with the lender 
from March 2009 to December 2009. The lender repeatedly lost his paperwork. They 
led him to believe they would modify the loan. While still leading him to believe his 
modification was imminent, the lender notified him that they were going to foreclose on 
his home in two days. If he tried to sell the condo, it was undervalued, and he would not 
receive enough proceeds to satisfy his first mortgage. He had reached an agreement for 
a loan modification on his second loan, but it was dependent on him getting the first 
mortgage modified. 14
 
 
 Applicant contacted a credit counseling agency to assist him. Knowing he 
needed to have a place for his sons, he decided to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His 
intention is to satisfy the plan by making consistent monthly payments. All of his other 
obligations are current. Part of the plan is that he must remit any income tax refund he 
receives to the trustee. The Chapter 13 stopped the foreclosure action. All of Applicant’s 
debts are included in the plan as noted above. His payments are automatically 
deducted from his pay. His current finances are under control.15
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
13 Tr. 130-139. 
 
14 Tr. 143-151. 
 
15 Tr. 151-156. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
7 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that were unpaid and unresolved for a period of 
time. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has been addressing his financial obligations since May 2010 through 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He has been making consistent payments. Because he 
is in the payment plan for the next four years, his debts are ongoing. I find mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. In good faith, Applicant attempted to help his 
cousin who promised to pay the rent on a leased that was signed by Applicant. His 
cousin failed to abide by the agreement, and Applicant was forced to expend money he 
could not afford. Applicant also found himself contractually committed to purchase a 
condo after the real estate market was in a downturn. He was also swindled out of 
$20,000. Although he obtained a judgment against the perpetrator it is unlikely he will 
receive any money from the judgment. These conditions were beyond Applicant’s 
control. I find AG ¶ 20(b) applies because the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problems were largely beyond Applicant’s control and he has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances in resolving them by filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and consistently 
making payments. I find Applicant’s gesture in helping his girlfriend with her car lease 
payments because he was hoping to salvage his relationship with her was within his 
 
8 
 
 
control. Applicant is paying those creditors who filed a claim in his bankruptcy. He is 
living within his means and his finances are stable. I find his debts are being resolved 
and under control. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and 20 (d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced financial 
difficulty when the construction of his condo was delayed and the real estate market 
took a downturn. He had to find other living arrangements for a period of time after he 
moved from the house where his children live. He helped his cousin who had a large 
family and was unemployed by signing a lease for him. His cousin failed to reimburse 
Applicant for the monthly rent. This had a big financial impact on Applicant. He filed for 
bankruptcy in May 2010 and has a five-year repayment plan that he has consistently 
paid, and which is controlled by the bankruptcy trustee. Applicant has put his finances 
back in order and has many incentives to maintain the payment plan. I find Applicant 
has met his burden of persuasion and his finances are no longer a security concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
