 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-09038
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by an extended period of unemployment
that began in August 2006. He has worked continuously for defense contractors in combat
areas since July 2007. Applicant has satisfied most of his delinquent debt, and he has
taken reasonable steps to assure that he and his wife will once again be able to live a
financially responsible lifestyle. Clearance is granted.
On April 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). On May
28, 2011, Applicant submitted a response to the SOR, in which he admitted all SOR
allegations and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant acknowledged on the record that he actually received the notice of hearing by e-mail on2
October 12, 2011 (Tr. 13-14).
2
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on September 28, 2011, and
reassigned to me on September 30, 2011, to be heard in conjunction with other hearings
I had scheduled in the same geographic area. A notice of hearing was issued on October
12, 2011, scheduling the hearing for October 27, 2011.  The hearing was conducted as2
scheduled. The Government submitted seven documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-7 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified, called his wife to testify on his behalf, and he submitted ten documentary exhibits
that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1-10, and admitted into the record without
objection. Department Counsel submitted one document following the hearing that was
admitted into the record as GE 8 without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding
memorandum for GE 8 was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and is included in the
record. The transcript was received on November 14, 2011.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 47-year-old man who has been employed as a heavy equipment
mechanic by a defense contractor since July 2008. Applicant works with the U.S. Army in
Afghanistan under contracts that are renewed annually. His current contract is due to be
renewed in January 2012. Applicant worked with the Army in Iraq for a different defense
contractor from July 2007 to July 2008. He was in training in the United States for his
original defense contractor employer in June 2007. Applicant was unemployed from August
2006 until June 2007. Applicant was employed as a shop foreman by a trucking company
from July 1991 until August 2007.
Applicant was first married in March 1983. That marriage ended by divorce in
August 1985. Applicant has a 28-year-old son from that marriage. Applicant has been
remarried since April 1989. He has three children, ages 26, 25, and 22, from this marriage.
Applicant dropped out of high school and did not learn to read until he was about
35 years old. His testimony, and the testimony of his wife, make it clear that he depended
on his wife to manage family finances until she experienced what she described as a
nervous breakdown during his extended period of unemployment. 
Applicant earned about $56,000 a year under the contract that sent him to Iraq in
2007. He currently earns approximately $125,000 a year. He and his wife have agreed that
she is no longer psychologically capable of managing their finances. As a result, Applicant
has $1,000 directly deposited into an account for her personal use. He retains a few
hundred dollars each month for his incidental expenses in Afghanistan. The balance of his
salary, approximately $8,000 a month, is deposited into a joint account he maintains with
his 26-year-old daughter. That daughter in married to a Marine Corps sergeant and is not
 The check paying the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.j was post-dated to a few days after the3
hearing. Applicant’s wife credibly testified why the check was post-dated and that her daughter would transfer
money to cover that check into her account before the date written on the check.    
3
co-located with her mother. However, the daughter consults with her mother, pays her
living expenses, and transfers money into an account maintained by her mother to pay
other debts when she is made aware of them.  
After Applicant left home to work in Iraq, the family home was foreclosed on.
Applicant’s wife moved to a different state for a period of time and thereafter lived with one
or the other of her children. Applicant saved the money he earned and provided his son
$100,000 to pay as a down payment on a house that was under construction. He and his
son then each paid about $50,000 to complete the purchase of the house. Applicant’s wife
now resides full-time with her son. 
Applicant submitted two letters from an attorney that establish the judgment listed
in SOR subparagraph 1.a was entered against his son from his first marriage and not him
(AE 10). Applicant’s wife credibly testified to conversations she had with an agent for the
creditor listed in subparagraph 1.b and 1.e, and they are duplicate entries for the same
account. She submitted proof that the account, as listed in subparagraph 1.e, has been
satisfied (AE 5). The judgment listed in subparagraph 1.c has been satisfied (AE 3). The
collection account listed in subparagraph 1.d was satisfied for about one-third the amount
the creditor claimed was due (AE 4). The collection account listed in subparagraph 1.f was
satisfied for about one-fifth the amount the creditor claimed was due (AE 6).
The debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g originated with a construction loan
Applicant and his wife took out in 2005 to have a new home built on property they owned.
The contractor obtained the money but failed to do any work. Applicant’s wife testified that
she attempted to report the fraud to several police agencies, apparently without obtaining
any relief. The debt remains unpaid. The debts listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.h and 1.I
have been satisfied (AE 7 and AE 8 ).3
Applicant’s credit report, dated November 20, 2008 (GE 3), discloses he appears
to have lived a financially responsible lifestyle before he experienced the extended period
of unemployment beginning in August 2006. With the exception of one “late 30 days” entry
in that credit report, all entries before 2006 reflect Applicant paid his debts “As Agreed.” 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.11
 Id. at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
4
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,6
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of7
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant8
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access12
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant had a number of accounts that became delinquent after he lost the job he
had held for 15 years. Most of those accounts remained delinquent until recently. One
delinquent debt still has not been satisfied. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability
5
or unwillingness to satisfy debts and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations
apply.
As Applicant’s November 2008 credit report indicates, Applicant’s delinquent
accounts were solely the result of his loss of a job he had held for 15 years. His wife
experienced what she described as a nervous breakdown as a result of the distress
caused by his loss of employment and the impact it had on their ability to pay their debts.
Applicant prudently obtained employment that provides his family with substantial income
that is managed by his daughter while he works in Afghanistan. He has invested a
substantial amount of money to purchase a home for the son with whom his wife resides.
Applicant has satisfied the overwhelming majority of the debts alleged in the SOR. He
provided proof of his basis for disputing one debt and credible testimony about the basis
for a dispute of a second debt. 
  
The following Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; MC 20(c): . . . there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control; MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and MC 20(e): the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial
considerations security concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his
ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-i: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

