 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 10-00342    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. After receiving Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection in 2001, Applicant has accumulated over $50,000 in delinquent debt, which 
remains unresolved. She did not falsify her security clearance application. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
2 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on September 2, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual bases for 
the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F, financial considerations, 
and Guideline E, personal conduct.    
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 30, 2010. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on December 16, 2010. 
She did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These items are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 trough 9. Applicant did not submit a 
response. The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2011. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In 2005, she retired 
from active duty military service after a 22-year career. She currently holds a security 
clearance.2 
 
 She married her current husband in 1997. In 2001, Applicant and her husband 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, under which $192,017 in debt was discharged. 
Since then, the couple has accumulated over $50,000 in delinquent debt, including a 
voluntary car repossession with an $11,520 deficit balance. Applicant claims that since 
2005, she and her husband have been victims of credit fraud. According to her credit 
report, in August 2009, just before submitting her security clearance application, 
Applicant filed an alert with one of the credit reporting agencies indicating that someone 
may have tried to fraudulently obtain credit in her name. She also requested that no 
credit be extended without first confirming her identity. In October 2010, two days before 
she answered the SOR, she retained a credit consultant to assist her in correcting and 
removing derogatory items from her credit report. In her Answer, she claimed to be 
waiting for the return of supporting documentation, but did not provide any such 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
2 GE 4 - 5. 
 
 
3 
 
documentation in response to the FORM. To date, Applicant has not provided evidence 
that the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR have been resolved.3 
 
 On her personal financial statement, Applicant reports an annual income of 
approximately $95,000, after taxes. She has a monthly net remainder of $3,200 and 
reports having $485,000 in total assets.4 
 
 On her security clearance application, submitted in August 2009, she disclosed a 
voluntary vehicle repossession in response to Section 26: Financial Record. She did not 
disclose in response to questions 26m and 26n5, respectively, any debts that had been 
more than 180 days past due within the last seven years of her application or any debts 
that were more than 90 days past due when she completed the application. She claims 
that she did not intend to falsify the application, but that she answered the questions 
based on what she believed to be true when she completed it. She did not note 
anywhere in the security clearance application that she was the victim of credit fraud.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
3 GE 4 - 5, GE 7 - 8. 
 
4 GE 6. 
 
5 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Section 26: Financial Record: For the 
following answer for the last 7 years unless otherwise specified in the question. Disclose all financial 
obligations, including those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor.  
 
m. Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)? 
 
n. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent in any debt(s)? 
 
6 GE 4- 5.  
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
Both disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant has a history of financial problems as 
evidenced by her seeking bankruptcy protection in 2001. After having $192,000 in debt 
discharged, Applicant again accumulated over $50,000 in delinquent debt by 
September 2010.   
 
  None of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 207 apply. Applicant 
claims that the alleged delinquent debt is not hers, but that she is the victim of credit 
fraud. In 2009, she requested a fraud alert with one of the credit reporting agencies. 
However, she has not provided any other evidence to substantiate her claims, let alone 
explain the circumstances of the fraud. Nor has she provided sufficient evidence to 
indicate that she has acted responsibly in light of the circumstances. An applicant is 
reasonably expected to have or be able to get documentation concerning her financial 
interests.8 In this case Applicant suggested in her Answer that such documentation 
exists, however, she did not submit it.  
 
 Applicant has not established that she is the victim of credit fraud. The record 
supports a finding that Applicant has a history of financial problems with no track record 
of financial reform or rehabilitation. She is not making any effort to reduce her 
delinquent debt despite her high income, substantial monthly net remainder, and her 
reported assets. She has not received financial counseling. Applicant’s financial 
problems are recent, ongoing, and continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
                                                          
7 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
8 ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001). 
 
6 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified her security clearance application 
because she did not list all of her delinquent accounts in response to Sections 26m and 
26n. It is clear that Applicant omitted all but one of her financial delinquencies from her 
security clearance application. She states, however, that her omissions were not 
intentional. Proof of omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when she completed the application. Viewing the record as a 
whole, there is not sufficient evidence, direct or circumstantial, to draw any conclusions 
on her state of mind when she completed the security clearance application.9 Because 
Applicant’s actions do not invoke any of the Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions, 
a discussion of the mitigating conditions is not necessary.  
 
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan10 and the clearly-consistent 
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this 
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, 
Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.b.:  For Applicant 
                                                          
9 See, ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004). 
 
10 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
