The Government withdrew the allegation under Foreign Influence before the hearing.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-11074
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On June 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).  The action was taken1
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in
September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned
the case to me on August 16, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued on September 6,
2011, and the case was heard on September 26, 2011. Department Counsel offered
four exhibits (GE) 1-4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his
own behalf and submitted three exhibits (AE) A-C at the hearing, which were admitted
2
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on October 4, 2011. Based on
a review of the pleadings, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant  met his burden of
proof on mitigation regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts in the SOR
with the exception of one account. Applicant is 30 years old. He is married and has one
daughter. He attended a military college and received his undergraduate degree in
2003. Applicant has been employed with his current employer since May 2010. (AE A)
Applicant incurred delinquent debts during his final year in college and the first
few years after. (GE 1) He disclosed on his security clearance application that he had
jobs that were based on commission. At the time, he had no financial difficulties and his
credit was good. He was earning sufficient income to support himself. (Tr. 12) He was
paying his student loans. 
Applicant explained that he worked tirelessly in the mortgage industry for several
years from 2004 until approximately 2007. When a financial downturn started and the
mortgage crisis began, the sale of luxury condominiums that was a great part of his
business came to a halt. Applicant had a loss of income and fell behind in his rent and
other expenses.
Applicant was determined to support himself and his family. He started working
in a family business in late 2006, while still working in the mortgage industry. The
company sold luxury items and was affected by the financial downturn as well. (Tr. 29)
In 2008, Applicant had little or no income. He lived with his grandparents. (Tr. 30) He
found a seasonal job late in 2008 making about $12,000 a year. (Tr. 31) He decided to
move his family to another state to improve job opportunities. 
In 2008, Applicant consolidated his accounts with Cambridge Credit Counselors.
He paid $500 a month for over a year. He learned that the company did not pay the
creditors. He was notified about a class action suit against the company. He is still
involved with the law suit. He has not recovered the money ($6,000)  that he sent to the
company during the year.  
The SOR lists delinquent accounts totaling approximately $13,000. The credit
reports in the record confirm the debts. (GE 2) Applicant acknowledges the debts. (Tr.
18) Applicant satisfied several accounts last year that are not reflected on the SOR.
The 
Government conceded that Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR 1.b and that 1.c is a
duplicate of 1.d., and amended the SOR.  His credit reports reflect the status. 
Applicant presented documentation that he is working with DSI Solutions to
settle the remaining three delinquent accounts. (AE B) Applicant was unsuccessful in
dealing with the creditors on his own, although he tried on numerous occasions. Some
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
companies wanted full payment, which he could not afford. He also disputes one
account. He plans to use a tax refund to pay on the remaining accounts. 
Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $80,000.  He has a detailed budget.
(AE A) At the hearing, Applicant noted that he has been promoted eight times since he
started his current work in 2010. He is now Deputy Program Manager. He has a
retirement account.  
Applicant submitted several  character references. His supervisor describes him
as a vital part of the security effort in the agency. He has demonstrated the ability and
trustworthiness to handle and protect classified information. The vice-president of the
company recommends Applicant for a security clearance. He notes that Applicant has
always performed his duties in a professional and disciplined manner. He is honest and
hardworking. (GE 4)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has acknowledged delinquent debts. His credit report confirms them.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
5
Applicant had financial difficulties due to unemployment and underemployment.
He worked on commission and, in 2008, did not earn any income. He attempted to work
for the family business but the financial downturn affected that company as well. He
acknowledges his debts. He has been gainfully employed since 2010 and has paid
several accounts. He also spent $500 a month in a consolidation plan that was not
legitimate. The class action suit is not yet resolved. He lost approximately $6,000 which
he believed was paying his creditors. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) is
potentially applicable. As noted, Applicant was on commission working in the mortgage
industry. When the financial crisis occurred, he was no longer making a salary that
could pay his bills. He tried to work in the family business but to no avail. He also
attempted to consolidate his debts. However, the company was taking his money and
not paying the creditors. He paid several accounts on his own. He has obtained the
services of another company to settle the three remaining debts. He follows a budget.
He has acted  reasonably under the circumstances. This mitigating condition applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant receives credit since he never
shirked from his responsibility to pay his creditors. He did not wait to start making
payments to the creditors. However, the company that he chose did not act in good
faith. Applicant has the capability and the motivation to pay the remaining three
accounts. He has done all that he could possibly do to address his delinquent accounts.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
applies. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 30 years old. He obtained his undergraduate degree and worked in the
mortgage industry for several years. Unfortunately, due to the economy, he did not
continue to prosper or earn any commissions for a number of years, which caused his
delinquent accounts. He has paid accounts, sought help from a consolidation company
and never tired in his efforts to pay his debts. He is married and supports his wife and
daughter. He is praised by his employer. He has worked successfully handling
classified information. He has been promoted many times in a short period of time.
Applicant’s financial difficulties stem from circumstances beyond his control. He
has acted reasonably in resolving his delinquent debts. He submitted information to
mitigate the security concerns raised in this case. The evidence clearly shows that he
has reduced his debt and will pay his remaining accounts. Clearance is granted.
 Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c: Withdrawn
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 2.a: Withdrawn
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
