                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 11-04212 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct concerns. She has been fired 
twice in the past four years for workplace misconduct. The most recent incident involved 
a breach of security. She failed to demonstrate that the inappropriate behavior that led 
to her employment terminations is unlikely to recur in the future. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 25, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that alleges the security 
concern under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
August 31, 2011 (Answer). She admitted the SOR allegations and requested a hearing.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On September 29, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. I was 
assigned the case on October 6, 2011 and, after coordinating with the parties, 
scheduled the hearing for November 16, 2011. 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing 
and testified on her own behalf. She did not offer any exhibits or call any witnesses. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on November 28, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. She recently married in April 2011. She has an 11-
year-old son, who lives with his grandmother due to her work schedule. She has an 
associate’s degree and has been working for her present employer as a security officer 
for the past three years. She was granted a security clearance in 2008.2 She did not 
present any evidence regarding her current duty performance. 
  
Applicant was employed as a security officer for security firm number 1 (SF 1) 
from February 2005 to October 2007. In 2006, Applicant was involved in a verbal 
altercation on the job with another security officer. During the course of the altercation, 
the other security officer assaulted her. Following an investigation by the company, the 
other officer was terminated and Applicant was retained by SF 1. In 2007, Applicant was 
involved in another verbal altercation on the job with a different security officer. The 
other security officer reported to their supervisor that Applicant had assaulted him 
during the altercation. The police and the company investigated the incident, including 
reviewing a videotape of the incident. Applicant testified that the video of the incident did 
not support the other officer’s claim of assault, but she has never actually viewed the 
video. Applicant was immediately suspended from her job. After SF 1 completed its 
investigation, Applicant was fired from her job. She then filed a grievance through her 
union and appealed the matter to SF 1’s corporate headquarters which, after conducting 
its own review of the matter, upheld her termination.3  
 
Applicant denies that she assaulted the other security officer in 2007, but admits 
that they were engaged in a verbal altercation on the job. She claims to have been fired 
from SF 1 because she was viewed as an employee who caused problems. The 
termination notice from SF 1 listed a history of issues with her duty performance, 
including the 2007 incident. Applicant claims that her union grievance is still pending 
arbitration, but did not submit any evidence regarding the grievance or arbitration.4 In 
her Answer, Applicant stated “I’m sure I can get witnesses to back me up at this time.” 
2 GE 1; Tr. at 26-28.  
 
3 GE 1 at 23-24 and 32; GE 2, Subject Interview at 2-3 [the other officer alleged that “(Applicant) 
was in his face and (Applicant) put her finger on his chin”]; Tr. at 29, 31-37, 41-48.  
 
4 Tr. at 41-48, 58-59. See also GE 1 at 32 (“This incident is still in arbitration status with the [ ] 
union. They swept my case under the rug and will not answer and justify my case.”). 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
She did not call any witnesses at the hearing or submit letters from any witness to 
corroborate her position that she did not assault a fellow security officer in 2007, which 
led to her termination from SF 1. 
 
 Applicant began working as a security officer for security firm number 2 (SF 2) in 
August 2008. Applicant’s job with SF 2 was to provide security for office buildings, 
whose tenants included government agencies and their personnel. She was fired from 
SF 2 in October 2010 because she failed to safeguard her firearm as required by the 
company’s rules and regulations. This was considered by SF 2 as a breach of security. 
Applicant had recently arrived to work at SF 2 from her other job when she called her 
supervisor requesting to be relieved from her post, so she could run some personal 
errands before going on vacation the following day. The supervisor denied the request 
and Applicant decided to leave her post without being properly relieved. She placed her 
firearm and ammunition in another officer’s unlocked drawer at what was designated by 
SF 2 as an unarmed post. The proper procedure was for Applicant to be relieved by her 
supervisor and her weapon properly secured. Applicant was aware of this procedure 
and knowingly violated it. She was caught by a DoD police officer, who pulled her over 
when, in her haste to accomplish her errands, she drove down a one-way street in the 
wrong direction. The DoD police officer recognized Applicant as the security officer who 
was supposed to be at a specific post. Applicant confessed to the DoD police officer 
that she had left her post without being properly relieved. The DoD police officer then 
discovered that Applicant had also improperly stored her weapon. Applicant was sent 
home and told by her supervisor to report the following day to the Vice President’s office 
to discuss the incident. She did not show up for the meeting and, instead, went on 
vacation. Applicant was then terminated from SF 2. Applicant testified that she accepts 
responsibility for the conduct that led to her termination from SF 2 in 2010.5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
5 GE 1 at 19-23 and 31; GE 2, Subject Interview at 2; GE 3; Tr. at 41, 48-60. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s employment terminations and, more specifically, the conduct that led 
to the terminations directly implicate this concern. Before proceeding further, I would 
note that although Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, which alleges she was terminated in 
2007 after getting into a confrontation with a co-worker, she has repeatedly denied 
assaulting her co-worker. The Government established by substantial evidence that 
Applicant assaulted her co-worker in 2007 and that incident led to her termination. SF 1 
clearly takes allegations of assault by one of its employees on a fellow co-worker 
seriously, as evidenced by the investigation and subsequent discharge of the employee 
who had assaulted Applicant in 2006. They followed suit in 2007 by conducting a 
thorough investigation, including reviewing the videotape of the incident, and 
determined that Applicant had assaulted her co-worker. She was subsequently fired for 
this conduct and a history of other work-related issues. When Applicant appealed her 
termination to SF 1’s corporate headquarters, the decision was independently reviewed 
by others and sustained. Even though Applicant was aware that this matter was a 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
security concern and promised to call witnesses to refute this allegation, she failed to 
present any evidence. Accordingly, I find by substantial evidence that Applicant 
assaulted a fellow co-worker during an altercation at work in 2007 and that she was 
subsequently fired as a result of this workplace violence. 
 
 Applicant’s misconduct that led to her terminations also raises the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
safeguard protected information; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 Applicant’s 2010 employment termination evidences her willingness to put her 
own self-interest ahead of rules and regulations established by her employer to provide 
for the security of others. She intentionally left her post without permission. Her 
employer, the tenants of the facility, and her fellow security officer’s placed their trust in 
Applicant to be at her post until properly relieved. Applicant’s conduct, in light of the real 
world dangers present today, cannot be taken lightly. She then compounded the 
situation by placing her firearm in an unlocked drawer in violation of the company’s rules 
and regulations. These serious rules violations, in conjunction with Applicant’s failure to 
accept responsibility for the conduct that led to her employment termination in 2007, 
establishes AG ¶ 16(c) and (f).6 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the serious security concerns raised by her conduct by 
establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 17. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions and find that the following warrant further 
discussion: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
6 I considered AG ¶ 16(d). Although the “credible adverse information” in this case was arguably 
“not explicitly covered under any other guideline”, it was “sufficient by itself for an adverse determination” 
under Guideline E. See ISCR Case No 06-21537 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008) (“the plain meaning of ¶ 
16(c) anticipates that the adjudicating official will reach a favorable determination, after considering 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, under another single guideline, but then, under this paragraph, 
consider the same conduct applying a whole-person analysis, which could result in an unfavorable 
determination.”). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct that led to her discharge in 2010 was recent. She placed the 
safety of others in jeopardy through her selfish act of leaving her post without 
permission. Such conduct is not minor, nor did it occur under unusual circumstances. 
Applicant continues to work as a security officer for a government contractor and failed 
to present any evidence that she now follows her employer’s rules and regulations 
without fault. She failed to demonstrate that the likelihood of this type of conduct 
reoccurring has completely dissipated. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant testified that she accepts responsibility for the conduct that led to her 
discharge in 2010. However, when she had the opportunity to take responsibility for her 
misconduct at the time the incident occurred, she did not show up to the meeting with 
her boss and, instead, went on vacation. Her immediate response to this incident 
speaks volumes as to the seriousness with which she took her security responsibility 
and leaves me with grave concern as to the manner in which she would discharge her 
responsibility vis-à-vis classified information in the future. She also did not present any 
evidence demonstrating she has changed the behavior that led her to put her own self-
interest above her employer’s rules and regulations. Further, she continues to deny 
culpability for the facts and circumstances that led to her discharge from SF 1 in 2007. 
AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. 
 
 As already discussed above, the Government established by substantial 
evidence the facts that led to Applicant’s employment termination from SF 1 in 2007. 
There was no credible evidence presented to rebut this evidence. Moreover, Applicant 
fully admits the serious misconduct that led to her employment termination in 2010. AG 
¶ 17(f) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct concern. The conduct that led 
to her employment terminations in 2007 and 2010 continues to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
7 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
factors in this case. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2008. She was until 
recently working two jobs to support herself and her child. She disclosed her 
employment terminations on her security clearance application and discussed this 
adverse information during her background interview. However, she violated the trust 
placed in her to protect the area that she had been assigned to for mere personal 
convenience. By doing so, she placed the safety and welfare of others in jeopardy. Her 
honesty in revealing this adverse information, as well as other favorable whole-person 
factors present in this case, does not mitigate the personal conduct concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is therefore denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
