 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-00965 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 13, 2008. On May 
26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960); 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 1, 2011; answered it on July 20, 2011; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
21, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 30, 2011, and the case 
 
2 
 
 
was assigned to me on September 9, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
September 14, 2011, scheduling the hearing for October 11, 2011. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through M, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until October 26, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
evidence. She timely submitted AX N, which was admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX N are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 19, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.e. Her admissions in her answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old service order coordinator employed by a defense 
contractor. (Tr. 47.) She graduated from high school in 1987. (Tr. 47.) She was a federal 
employee from July 1987 to June 1989. She married in February 1993, and two 
children, now ages 18 and 21, were born during the marriage. From June 1989 until 
May 1998, she was a stay-at-home mother.  
 
 Applicant and her husband filed a joint petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 
1998 and received a discharge in October 1998. (GX 4.) She and her husband filed the 
bankruptcy petition after he accumulated numerous delinquent credit card accounts and 
student loans. (Tr. 39.) The record does not reflect the specific debts that were 
discharged. 
 
 Applicant’s husband left her at about the same time as they filed for bankruptcy, 
forcing her to seek full-time employment. (Tr. 50.) Between mid-1998 and May 2002, 
she worked at private-sector jobs. She was unemployed from May to July 2002. She left 
a job with a ceramic tile company in November 2002, after she refused to sign a form 
regarding her understanding of company procedures because it did not reflect the 
procedures they followed. She left her next job in November 2003 following allegations 
of unsatisfactory performance. (GX 1 at 31-32.) She divorced her husband in December 
2003. She has worked for her current employer for about eight years. (Tr. 48.) 
 
Applicant initially received child support from her ex-husband totaling about 
$1,003 per month. (Tr. 54.). The child support was reduced to $465 per month when 
their teenaged son began having behavioral problems and moved in with his father. 
When their son was 16 years old, he impregnated his girlfriend. He and his pregnant 
girlfriend moved in with Applicant, and his father stopped paying child support for him. 
Applicant did not seek a court order to compel payment of child support. (Tr. 57-58.) 
Applicant obtained a court order making her the custodial parent of her son’s girlfriend 
until September 2007. (GX 1 at 28.) Applicant’s son beat his girlfriend and frightened 
Applicant and her daughter. After a violent incident during the summer of 2007, 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s daughter moved in with her father, and her father stopped paying child 
support for her.  
 
In November or December 2007, Applicant was hired by the contractor for whom 
she had been a subcontractor, but she did not realize that she could no longer work 
overtime as an employee of the contractor. Consequently, her income dropped by about 
$1,000 per month. (Tr. 38-42.) 
 
Applicant’s son and his wife had a son in February 2008. (Tr. 52.) Her son then 
joined the U.S. Marine Corps, and his wife and child moved out of the house. By this 
time, Applicant was deeply in debt. She rented rooms in her home, but her renters did 
not pay the rent. (Tr. 64.) She sold her home in a short sale in 2008. Her credit report of 
July 30, 2010, reflects that the amount due on her mortgage was “legally paid in full for 
less than the full balance.” (GX 6 at 4.) She filed a second Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition 
in June 2011, solely in her name. She completed the course on financial management 
required by the bankruptcy court in July 2011. (AX K.) She received a discharge in 
September 2011. (GX 3; AX H.)  
 
The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d became delinquent after 
Applicant’s income was reduced in late 2007, her son and his pregnant girlfriend began 
living with her, and her ex-husband stopped paying child support. These debts were 
included in Applicant’s most recent bankruptcy. (AX N.)  
 
The $10,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was a $7,600 line of credit opened in 
May 2008. (GX 2 at 6.) The record does not reflect what Applicant purchased or paid 
with these funds. Her August 2008 credit report reflected that the account was being 
paid as agreed. (GX 5 at 8-9.) Her July 2010 credit report reflected that her payments 
were 60 days past due. (GX 6 at 9.) Her February 2011 credit report reflected that the 
debt was charged off in the amount of $10,000. (GX 7 at 1.) 
 
The $1,306 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was for clothing. (GX 2 at 6.) Applicant’s 
August 2008 credit report reflected that this account was opened in April 2004, had a 
balance of $343, and was current. (GX 5 at 7.) Her July 2010 credit report reflected a 
balance of $1,306 referred for collection. (GX 6 at 7.) Her February 2011 credit report 
reflected that the debt was charged off in the amount of $1,306. (GX 7 at 2.) 
 
The $1,479 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c also was for clothing. (GX 2 at 6.) 
Applicant’s August 2008 credit report reflected that this account was opened in July 
2006, had a balance of $1,836, and was current. (GX 5 at 10.) Her July 2010 credit 
report reflected that this debt was referred for collection in the amount of $1,479. (GX 6 
at 4.). Her February 2010 credit report reflected that the debt was charged off. (GX 7 at 
2.) 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was a charge account with a jewelry and camera 
store. Applicant’s August 2008 credit report dated reflected that she opened this 
account in August 2006, was making monthly payments of $66 as agreed, and had a 
 
4 
 
 
balance of $757. (GX 5 at 11.) Her July 2010 credit report reflected that the account 
was closed by the credit grantor after it became 120 days delinquent. (GX 6 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant denied the delinquent $822 telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This 
account was opened in October 2000. It was not listed on her August 2008 credit report. 
It was charged off in April 2010 and paid in full in February 2011. (GX 2 at 16; GX 6 at 
8; Tr. 77, 84-85.) The creditor is Applicant’s current employer. 
 
 After Applicant’s son and his wife separated in early 2010, Applicant became 
concerned about the welfare of her two-year-old granddaughter. In June 2011, she 
obtained legal custody of her granddaughter. Her son pays $400 per month in child 
support. (Tr. 43-46.) 
 
Applicant completed an online debt education course, and she has formulated a 
monthly budget. She is currently living with her fiancé and her granddaughter. She and 
her fiancé share household expenses. (Tr. 43-44, 46-47.) 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in August 2010, she 
reported net monthly income of $2,720, expenses of $2,325, debt payments of $554, 
and a monthly shortfall of $159. (GX 2 at 7.) In response to DOHA interrogatories in 
April 2011, she submitted a personal financial statement reflecting net monthly income 
of $2,738, expenses of $2280, debt payments of $458, and a remainder of less than a 
dollar. (GX 2 at 13.)  
 
 Applicant owes federal income taxes from tax year 2009. Her 2010 refund was 
seized for the tax debt, but she still owes about $1,600. She has not made any payment 
arrangements for this debt. She last contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
about ten months before the hearing. (Tr. 89-90.) She testified she has made no recent 
attempts to contact the IRS because of her frustrating experience of working through a 
telephone menu only to be connected to “somebody that can’t help you.” She testified, “I 
don’t have time during my workday to be on the phone all day with the IRS.” (Tr. 91.) 
This debt is not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s pay vouchers reflect a tax levy of $223 in September 2011. (AX I at 3-
4.) She testified the levy was imposed because she did not pay the personal property 
tax on her car. (Tr. 88.) This debt is satisfied and is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant’s pay vouchers also reflect a loan from her retirement account that she 
is repaying by deductions from her pay at the rate of $45.72 per pay period for 36 
months. (AX I at 1-5.) She used this loan to pay the legal fees for her recent bankruptcy. 
(Tr. 87.) The loan is current and is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 In preparation for the hearing, Applicant downloaded a budget program. Her 
budget for October 2011 reflects total monthly income of $5,748, expenses of $3,537, 
and a net remainder of $2,211. For November 2011, her income is the same but her 
expenses are $2,559. Her budgeted net income reflects the repayment of the loan from 
 
5 
 
 
her retirement account. The increased net monthly income reflected in her recent 
budget resulted from combining her income with her fiancé’s. She has about $713 in her 
checking account and $6,737 in her retirement account. (AX I, L, and M.) Her budget 
does not provide for payment of her delinquent federal taxes. As of the date of the 
hearing, she had no open credit card accounts. (Tr. 73.) 
 
 Applicant’s fiancé testified that he has known Applicant since childhood and they 
have lived together for about six months. Applicant was vague about their marriage 
plans, testifying that they had not set a marriage date because they “have enough 
obstacles to get over now.” (Tr. 47.) However, her fiancé testified that they plan to marry 
in September 2012. (Tr. 104.) They share household expenses. Applicant’s fiancé 
described her as loyal, ethical, and devoted to her family. He has no doubts about her 
honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness. (Tr. 98-105.) 
 
 A friend for the last 13 years met Applicant while operating a daycare center 
where Applicant left her children. She watched Applicant raise her children, deal with 
the son’s behavioral problems, and struggle with her finances. She described Applicant 
as “incredible.” The friend became a coworker for about three and a half years and was 
impressed by her dedication, honesty, and intelligence. Tr. 109-117.) 
 
 Applicant submitted seven letters from friends, coworkers, supervisors, and 
government employees who supervise the program on which she works. A friend and 
coworker describes her as dedicated, morally strong, talented, and absolutely 
trustworthy. (AX A.) A friend and neighbor for the past 15 years regards her as very 
loyal, honest, and trustworthy. (AX B.) Her branch chief, who has known her for about a 
year, describes her as dedicated, creative, skilled, and trustworthy. (AX C.) A seasoned 
government employee, with 36 years of service, considers her a “huge asset” who is 
being groomed to be hired as a government employee at the first available opportunity. 
(AX D.) A facilities coordinator describes her as a “true asset” who is dedicated, 
talented, prompt, and responsive. (AX E.) The program manager for whom she worked 
as a subcontractor until she was hired by the contractor strongly supports her 
application for a clearance. (AX F.) A friend, who has known Applicant for ten years and 
worked with her on youth programs, states that she is honest and ethical, and her 
integrity and sincerity are without question. (AX G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
6 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling about $14,758. Applicant 
admitted the four debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. She denied the debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.e and produced evidence that it was paid in full.  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant:  
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
AG ¶ 19(b): indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending 
and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;  
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
Although Applicant paid the debt alleged SOR ¶ 1.e in February 2011, it raises 
security concerns because it was charged off as a bad debt in April 2010. Applicant’s 
admissions and her credit reports establish AG ¶ 19(a), (c), and (e).  
Applicant’s indebtedness to a jewelry and camera store while on a limited income 
qualifies as “frivolous or irresponsible spending,” within the meaning of AG ¶ 19(b). She 
initially demonstrated willingness and intent to pay the debt by making the regular 
payments reflected on her August 2008 credit report, but she stopped making payments 
when her income was reduced and made no further efforts to resolve this debt until it 
was discharged in her Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 19(b) also is 
established.   
 Applicant’s federal income tax debt and her failure to timely pay the personal 
property tax on her car were not alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR 
 
8 
 
 
may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the evidence of her delinquent tax debts for 
these limited purposes. 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s debts are 
recent and numerous. However, they did occur under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur. Her husband left her with two children, bad credit, no financial resources, limited 
education, and minimal work experience. Nevertheless, her August 2008 credit report 
reflected that she was able to pay her debts until she suffered an unexpected income 
reduction and the financial burden of supporting her irresponsible son, his pregnant 
wife, and her granddaughter was thrust upon her. She now has custody of her 
granddaughter but is no longer supporting her son and her daughter-in-law. Her recent 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge resolved her delinquent debts, and she has sufficient 
income to handle her current living expenses. However, her dilatory approach toward 
resolving her federal tax liability militates against a finding that recurrence of delinquent 
debts is unlikely. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The circumstances set out in the 
above discussion of AG ¶ 20(a) were largely beyond Applicant’s control. However, her 
losses of employment in November 2002 and November 2003 appear to have been 
largely her fault and not due to circumstances beyond her control. Applicant initially 
made reasonable efforts to satisfy her financial obligations. However, after she and her 
fiancé began living together and sharing expenses, she had a net monthly remainder of 
more than $2,200, but she made no reasonable efforts to resolve her delinquent debts, 
including her unpaid federal taxes. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
received counseling mandated by the bankruptcy court. In addition, she has conducted 
on-line research into family budgeting, and she has begun to apply what she has 
learned. She has sufficient income to manage her current expenses, including the 
delinquent federal taxes. However, she has taken no steps to resolve her federal 
income tax debt, and insufficient time has passed since her bankruptcy discharge for 
 
9 
 
 
her to establish a track record of financial responsibility. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) is 
not fully established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of every 
debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement 
that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
While bankruptcy is a legally permissible option and removes the pressure to 
obtain funds that underlies Guideline F security concerns, it does not necessarily show 
a good-faith effort within the meaning of this guideline. An applicant must do more than 
show that he or she relied on a legally available option such as bankruptcy in order to 
claim the benefit of this mitigating condition. See ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 15, 2007).  
 
In this case, Applicant’s actions initially showed good faith. She immediately 
sought and obtained employment after her husband left her. She tried renting rooms in 
her home, without success. She sold her home in a short sale, but the proceeds were 
insufficient to resolve all her debts. She resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e before 
she received the DOHA financial interrogatories or the SOR. On the other hand, she 
continued with her plan to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition even after her net 
monthly income increased substantially. As of the date of the hearing, she had made no 
attempts to resolve her federal income tax debt for at least ten months. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition applies to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but not the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, which Applicant has not disputed. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Thus, I have focused on the circumstances 
surrounding the debts rather than the question whether they have been resolved. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has struggled to support herself and her family 
since her marital breakup. She has a reputation among friends, coworkers, and 
supervisors for determination, trustworthiness, and reliability. Her current budget is a 
realistic step toward financial stability. On the other hand, the viability of her budget 
depends on Applicant and her fiancé continuing to live together and share living 
expenses, even though she and her fiancé gave inconsistent testimony at the hearing 
about their marriage plans. Her budget does not provide for paying her federal income 
taxes. Insufficient time has passed since her most recent bankruptcy discharge for her 
to establish a track record of financial responsibility.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
