1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-03814
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On July 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline G
(Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In an August 2, 2011, response, Applicant admitted the three allegations set
forth under Guideline G and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to an
administrative judge on August 31, 2011. The case was reassigned to me on
September 28, 2011, for caseload considerations. The parties proposed a hearing date
of October 19, 2011. A notice setting that date for the hearing was issued on
September 29, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Applicant gave testimony and introduced 18 documents, which were accepted
into the record as exhibits (Exs.) A-R. Department Counsel offered five documents,
which were admitted as Exs. 1-5 without objection. The parties were given until
November 1, 2011, to submit any additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) of the
 Tr. 23.      1
 Ex. D (Stepmother’s letter, dated Oct. 14, 2011) at 2.      2
 Tr. 24-25; Exs. Q-R (selected articles and materials).      3
 See Tr. 48 (Applicant noted that his use of alcohol was “just usually on weekends.”)       4
 Tr. 26 (In expressing his contrition, Applicant stated: “I take full responsibility for this, I was young, stupid      5
and put myself in a bad situation.  I was an embarrassment to my school, my . . . team, my family and
myself.”)
2
proceeding was received on October 28, 2011. On November 1, 2011, Department
Counsel forwarded without objection four additional documents timely submitted by
Applicant. They were accepted as Exs. S-V and the record was closed. Based on a
review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applican000000
.t met his burden of mitigating security concerns related to alcohol consumption.
Clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 23-year-old engineer who has worked for the same defense
contractor for over a year. He has earned a bachelor’s degree in engineering. Applicant
is single and has no children. 
Applicant’s parents divorced when he was five years old. His mother, with whom
he primarily resided, then remarried. Her new husband was abusive, untrustworthy, and
an alcoholic who often deserted the family. While Applicant recounts the day he learned
his mother was divorcing the man as “one of the happiest days” of his life.  His mother1
ultimately remarried, as did his biological father. During this time, Applicant split his time
between his two biological parents’ households. When Applicant was about 10, he was
devastated when his father died of cancer.  His passing impacted Applicant’s biological2
mother greatly and she turned to alcohol. His mother’s use of alcohol soon turned to
alcoholism, followed by multiple interventions and commitments in rehabilitation. To
escape from home pressures, Applicant concentrated on sports and music in high
school, where his prowess in both areas led to state-wide notoriety.   He ultimately3
graduated with a 3.6 grade point average and was highly sought after by colleges.
In college, Applicant led a typical collegiate life. He continued to excel in
academics and sports. He also began consuming alcohol with his peers on weekends.4
In June 2008, after completing his sophomore year, he was issued a citation for
possession of a malt beverage at a college party. He paid a $250 fine and his driver’s
license was suspended for 30 days.  5
Despite success in collegiate sports, Applicant decided to concentrate on
engineering after his sophomore year of college. During his final two years of college,
he maintained a 3.3 grade point average, volunteered with local civic organizations, and
completed highly competitive internships with local engineering firms. By the time he
graduated college in May 2010, he had already received multiple job offers from
 Tr. 27, 35-42; Ex. O (Attorney’s letter, dated Sep. 26, 2011, and local docket sheet).      6
 Tr. 27, 42; Ex. V (Court record).      7
 Tr. 43.      8
 Tr. 28.      9
 Id.      10
3
reputable companies. As part of his graduation celebration that May, Applicant and
three friends decided to visit a nearby college town. While returning home from the local
bars, they encountered a fiberglass rendering of an animal that was part of a city-wide
fundraising display. One of his friends tipped the statue over, effectively damaging it.
The four were quickly arrested. Because the statutes were estimated to be potentially
worth about $3,500 as part of the fundraising initiative, and therefore worth in excess of
$1,000, the four were charged with felony misdemeanor mischief. The friend who
actually caused the damage was ultimately found guilty of the charge and made
restitution. Meanwhile, Applicant’s case, in which he denied causing the damage, was
ultimately dismissed.   6
At the end of the summer of 2010, Applicant moved to a nearby state in
preparation of beginning his career with his current employer. On September 11, 2010,
Applicant went to a bar with a co-worker. On his way home, he was pulled over by
police. When it was determined he had been consuming alcohol, he was cited for
Driving Under the Influence (DUI). Being a first time offender, he was diverted to a
special program, under which he was required to adhere to the program and relinquish
his driver’s license to four months. He successfully completed that program, his license
was restored, and the DUI charge was dismissed.  7
Although Applicant did not regularly imbibe alcohol, the three alcohol-related
incidents began to concern him. On January 29, 2011, Applicant and his girlfriend, with
whom he has a committed relationship, were visiting his sister. Applicant drank to
excess and got into an argument with his girlfriend. The incident was upsetting to both
Applicant and his girlfriend. She does not approve of Applicant’s use of alcohol. She
has been alcohol-free for at least four years.  Given the examples set by both his8
former stepfather and his mother, who by now was a recovering alcoholic and member
of Alcoholic’s Anonymous (AA), Applicant was well aware of the potential alcohol might
have to control his life. About that incident, Applicant noted: “At that point I finally
realized that drinking just isn't worth it. Literally everything I have done wrong in my life
has been related to drinking. I am a good person.”  He has not consumed alcohol since9
that date.
With the support of mother, girlfriend, and friends, Applicant immediately and
voluntarily began attending AA. While sacrificing alcohol was not a physical struggle,
the experience gave him further insight into both himself and the disease.  He now10
understands why he previously abused alcohol and, therefore, now relies on alternative
outlets for mental escape and relaxation. He received his AA six-month chip on June
 Tr. 13-14.       11
 Ex. P (Certificate, date Jun. 15, 2011). The education program also served to help satisfy Applicant’s first      12
offenders program.
 Tr. 28. Applicant testified that he felt he was an alcoholic, although he stated that his self-identification      13
was not made in clinical terms: “I never felt dependent on it, like I had to drink, like I needed to drink to carry
out my life. But I think I'm an alcoholic in the sense that it brings trouble to myself, I change, it puts me in bad
situations. That's one thing that I learned in that class is that it's not necessarily someone that has to drink,
it's when someone starts getting in trouble and it starts really effecting their lives, that's when -- that's a form
of alcoholism I guess.” Tr. 46-47.
 See, e.g., Tr. 56 (“as to mitigation . . . to be very frank, the Applicant seems to have a very mature and      14
sincere response to his own concerns about alcohol and his inability to drink alcohol going forward and, . . .
he seems to be in a positive environment now.”)
 Tr. 31-32. Applicant notes, however, that his hometown friends appreciate and understand his decision      15
to refrain from alcohol. Tr. 32.
 Ex. D, supra, note 2.      16
 Id.  Applicant’s stepmother wrote an insightful letter on Applicant’s behalf. She noted that she feels he      17
“was using alcohol to cope with his mother’s alcoholism” and wrote that she now feels he is rightfully “on his
way now in his adult life after spending a few years being lost. . . . I feel that his truly is a success story.”
4
29, 2011.  He also completed an alcohol education program that same month.  In the11 12
process, Applicant has found becoming alcohol-free to be a significant learning
experience: “The fact is when I drink, I change; my judgement goes out the window and
I put myself in bad situations.  Everything that has happened in relation to my drinking
has been the most stressful things I have faced and has affected my life dramatically. . .
. I am so grateful I have realized that there is life outside of drinking, I have realized this
at a young age.”13
Today, Applicant maintains his sobriety. He has done much to rehabilitate
himself from his past conduct.  He now lives by himself in a city far removed from his14
college and hometown friends.  His new friends and associates are appreciative of his15
non-use of alcohol. He generally eschews the bar scene in favor of nights at home with
his girlfriend, dinners with friends, or visits to the gym. With his mother successfully
involved in AA and happily remarried, he is no longer overly concerned about her well-
being He has refocused his attention on sports and music, taking up the guitar and
playing in a local basketball league to relax and reduce stress.  Most of his current16
friends are new and are part of his professional circle. 
Applicant is fully committed to maintaining his sobriety. He does not simply
dismiss the alcohol-related incidents from his past as mere instances of youthful
indiscretion, but of personal warning signs that he had to implement serious changes in
his life. He has established a tangible support network that is available in case he again
faces stressors that might incite him to use alcohol. As needed, he continues to seek
periodic support from AA and his peers. He also receives significant support from his
mother, stepfather, girlfriend, and stepmother, who has played a significant role in
Applicant’s life and is proud of his decision to stay sober.  He is now happier with his17
 Tr. 28-29.      18
 Tr. 29.      19
 Ex. J (Letter, dated Sep. 30, 2011).      20
 See, e.g., Ex. F (Letter, dated Sep. 30, 2011); Ex. J, supra, note 16.      21
 Ex. M (Letter, dated Sep. 30, 2011).      22
 Ex. N (Letter, dated Sep. 12, 2011).      23
5
life than he has been in the past. He is excelling at work, his familial relationships are
improved, and he is contemplating marriage.  He stated that,  “[i]f there is one thing I18
have learned through all this it's how much I will lose if I pick up another drink, I would
lose everything I have worked my whole life for.  Much of what I have worked for has
already been put in jeopardy. . . . I am a changed person and changed for the better.”19
In the past year at work, Applicant has proved to be a valued employee and has
received a raise. He has earned a reputation as a quick learner who is communicative
and reliable.  Applicant’s recent maturation has been noted by his elders and20
professional peers.  He continues to impress his superiors in his civic volunteering21
duties as a committed individual.  In his apartment complex, Applicant is well-regarded,22
pays his rent in a timely manner, and has not been the source of any complaints.23
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      24
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      25
 Id.      26
 Id.      27
 AG ¶ 21.      28
6
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a24
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  25
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b). “The clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on
the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be26
allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
sensitive information.27
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption),
is the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to that AG that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  In this case, Applicant admits three28
allegations, each referencing alcohol-related behavior. Those admissions are sufficient
to raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting,
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) and AC
DC AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
7
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent). With disqualifying conditions raised, the burden shifts to Applicant
to raise mitigating conditions.
At issue are three alcohol-related incidents that occurred between 2008 and
2010. Applicant has been sober for slightly less than one year. Both he and his family
members feel he has been able to control his desire to seek refuge in alcohol. Applicant
has actively and rigorously examined the source of his occasional abuse of alcohol,
completed an alcohol education program, attended AA, and redeveloped alternative
activities for stress relief. He has the full support of his extended family, friends, and
peers for maintaining his sobriety. He no longer views alcohol as a panacea for his
former family problems. He credibly stated that he has never been happier than he is
now, and offered multiple examples of how his professional and personal life have
improved in the past year. In light of these considerations, Alcohol Consumption
Mitigating Conditions (AC MC) AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the behavior
was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur or does not cast doubt on individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgement) and AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or
issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem,
and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if
an alcohol abuser)) apply. Although Applicant admits that he abused alcohol and
considers himself to be an alcoholic in a non-clinical sense of the term, there is no
evidence he has ever been referred for alcohol treatment or that such treatment was
warranted. Consequently, none of the other mitigating conditions apply (ie. AG ¶ 23(c)-
(d)).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a credible and straight-forward young man whose testimony and demeanor
reflected genuine introspection and contrition for his past alcohol abuse. Viewing the
issues from the whole-person perspective, it is admitted that the alcohol-related
behavior at issue constitutes criminal behavior and, therefore, is conduct of a serious
nature. Applicant fully appreciates the gravity of the issues. While his abuse of alcohol
could be attributed, in part, to the cumulative pressures resulting from familial issues, it
is also noted that such abuse is not an atypical amongst immature collegians. At the
times in question, Applicant was between the ages of 20 and 22. There is no evidence
that alcohol posed a problem before or since that period.
8
By the end of his 22  year, Applicant made the proactive decision to quit usingnd
alcohol entirely. To that end, he sought the support of his those closest to him – his
family and his girlfriend. He immediately began AA, where he successfully earned his
six-month chip, and completed an alcohol education program. To date, Applicant
revisits AA to keep its tenants fresh. He maintains the support of his colleagues,
seniors, and peers in eschewing alcohol. In nearly a year of sobriety, he has excelled at
work, improved his family relationships, felt happier, returned to his love of music and
sports, and is now contemplating marriage. These positive attributes help demonstrate
his recent maturation and have proven sufficient to inspire him to never again abuse
alcohol. While one year of sobriety may appear to be a short period of time, it is a
significant and appropriate length of time in the life of this 23-year-old, whose alcohol
abuse seems to have been restricted to periodic weekends during a two year period.  
In accomplishing his goal to quit alcohol, Applicant has shown sound judgment
and the ability to control his impulses. Through his actions and his credible testimony,
Applicant demonstrated his present trustworthiness. I feel confident that his
commitment to his family, girlfriend, and himself to maintain his sobriety is genuine and
steadfast. Security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
