 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-05443    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. For seven months in 2009, Applicant 
falsified his timecards while working as a government contractor. He failed to mitigate 
the personal conduct concerns raised by his actions. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 5, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual basis for 
the action under security Guideline E (personal conduct). 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 1, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 12, 
2011. He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief, which are 
admitted as identified in the FORM as Items 1 though 6. Applicant did not submit a 
response. The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2011. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works in the 
information technology field. He has worked for his current employer since April 2007.2 
 
 In December 2008, Applicant accepted a position on a contract with the 
understanding that he would be working at a location in Washington, DC. Instead, he 
was assigned to a location in Arlington, Virginia — a 1.5 to 2 - hour commute from his 
home. He tried, unsuccessfully, to find a position closer to home. Between April 2009 
and October 2009, Applicant left work 30 to 45 minutes early at least twice each week 
without taking leave. On each occasion, he recorded a full work day on his timecard. He 
did this until he was transferred to a work site in Washington, D.C.3 
  
 In 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance with another government 
agency. During a polygraph, he disclosed his timecard falsifications. As a result, the 
other agency denied Applicant’s request for access to classified information under the 
personal conduct guideline. Applicant reported the denial on his SF-86, dated 
November 12, 2010. At the time of his background investigation interview in June 2011, 
he admitted that he had not disclosed his actions to his employer.4 
 
 Applicant admits, takes responsibility, and expresses regret for his behavior. He 
has since complied with all of his employer’s rules and regulations and intends to do so 
in the future.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 GE 5- 6.  
 
4 GE 5-6. 
 
5 GE 5-6.  
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
4 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing 
false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority, or other official representative.” 
 
 Applicant admits that over the course of seven months, he routinely left work 
early. On its face, this seems inconsequential, but it is not. Applicant falsified his 
timecards. In doing so, he accepted compensation, in salary and accrued leave, for time 
that he did not work. Applicant’s actions were an immature response to a legitimate 
work-related concern. His actions cast doubt on his security worthiness that remain 
unabated. 
  
 Of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶17, none apply. There is no 
indication that Applicant made any effort to disclose his behavior prior to being 
confronted during the polygraph with the other government agency. Furthermore, he 
has not disclosed or corrected the falsifications with his employer. As a result, his 
actions cannot be mitigated by the passage of time and he remains vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, manipulation, and duress. The behavior cannot be considered 
minor or trivial because he received financial benefit from his deception. Nor has 
Applicant provided any evidence to indicate that he would not repeat this behavior if he 
were again assigned to a geographically undesirable location. Because Applicant did 
not present any mitigation evidence, the security concerns in this case are resolved in 
favor of the Government.  
 
Applicant engaged in improper conduct as a 24-year-old new to the professional 
world. Although he acknowledges the wrongfulness of his actions, he did not provide 
any information to explain his conduct or refute the resultant security concerns. This 
decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot mitigate the 
concerns raised by his conduct and establish that he possesses the honesty, integrity, 
and good judgment necessary to justify the granting of a security clearance. The award 
of a security clearance is not a once in a life time occurrence, but is based on applying 
the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. A clearance is 
not recommended under the current circumstances, but should he be afforded an 
opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, he may well demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
