 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 14, 2010. On April 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E and F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On May 5, 2011, Applicant answered the 
SOR and waived his right to a hearing. Department Counsel converted the case to a 
hearing within the prescribed time period. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 
2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 24, 2011, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on September 15, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
list of exhibits was marked hearing exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A and B that were admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
was held open until October 6, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant timely submitted AE C through H that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel’s email forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission 
was marked HE 2. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 23, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. Air Force from 1976 to 1996 and retired in the grade of E-6. He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in 1994. He is not currently married. He has been divorced three 
times and has four children, ages 26, 23, and twins 21. He has held a security 
clearance while in the military and while working for defense contractors.1 
 
In the SOR, the sole Guideline E allegation asserted that, in February 2008, 
Applicant was terminated from a job for theft and misappropriation of approximately 
$14,000.00 of golf event proceeds that were entrusted to him as Treasurer of the 
[Company X] Employees Golf Association. The Guideline E allegation was cross-
alleged in a Guideline F allegation. In his Answer, Applicant admitted the Guideline E 
allegation, but denied the Guideline F allegation. His admission to the Guideline E 
allegation is incorporated herein as a finding of fact.2 
 
Applicant’s Testimony 
 
In 1997, Applicant started working for a company that eventually merged with 
Company X. After the merger, he worked for Company X. In 2005, he was asked to 
serve as the Treasurer of the [Company X] Employees Golf Association. The golf 
association maintained a checking account at a bank. As treasurer of the golf 
association, Applicant could write checks on that account as well as make deposits and 
withdrawals. He would write checks on the account to pay for the golf association’s 
operating expenses and for prizes awarded at golf tournaments.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-8, 18, 55; GE 1; AE A.  
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 26-29; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
 
 
When Applicant became treasurer, there was approximately $5,000 in the golf 
association’s bank account. At that time, he was informed that the bank account had a 
$10,000 cap. He believed that, if the amount of money in the account exceeded 
$10,000, the bank would impose charges or fees. He never discussed how the cap 
worked with the bank.4 
 
As time passed, the amount of money in the golf association’s bank account 
grew. He testified that, in about 2006, he informed the president of the golf association 
that he was placing some of the association’s funds in his personal account to avoid the 
$10,000 cap fees and the president gave him permission to do so. He also would 
temporarily place golf association funds in his safe at home pending their deposit in 
either his or the golf association’s bank accounts. He testified that he maintained 
records of the golf association funds that he retained in his account or at his home and, 
in doing so, tried to keep the golf association’s funds separate from his funds. During his 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, however, he reportedly indicated 
that he did not keep records to show the amount of golf association funds in his 
account. He also testified that he spoke to a representative of the company’s Human 
Resources (HR) Department about opening another bank account for the golf 
association. The HR representative informed him that the company would not obtain 
another Tax ID Number to create a new account. The HR representative recommended 
he open another account using his name and social security number, but he declined to 
open such an account.5 
 
Applicant indicated that the transferring of golf association funds into his account 
was a common practice that he engaged in while serving as its treasurer. He claimed 
that he never intended to use the golf association’s funds for his personal purposes. By 
depositing golf association funds in his personal account, he recognized, however, that 
he could have used some of the golf association’s funds for personal purposes.6 
 
In late June or early July 2007, Applicant and his second wife divorced. At that 
time, he went on a business trip and allowed her to reside in his house. When he 
returned from that trip, he learned some of the checks written on the golf association’s 
bank account bounced because he forgot to transfer money into the golf association’s 
bank account. Prior to her departure, his ex-wife took money that belonged to the golf 
association from his personal bank account and from the safe. He noted that his ex-wife 
had access to the automatic teller machine (ATM) card and personal identification 
number (PIN) for his personal account. He indicated that she also wrote some checks 
on his personal account.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27-29; GE 2, 3. 
5 Tr. 33-35, 43-50, 53; GE 2, 3.  
6 Tr. 37-40, 42-52, 61; GE 2.  
7 Tr. 29-35, 37-40, 42, 50-55; GE 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Due to the bounced checks, the board of directors of the golf association 
examined its bank account. It was determined that approximately $12,000 was missing 
from the account. Applicant was given a month to repay the missing funds. He repaid 
$8,800 within that time period, but was unable to repay about $3,100. The board of 
directors of the golf association asked him to resign as treasurer. He resigned in 
September or October 2007. Company X was informed of the missing funds and 
conducted an investigation. Applicant stated that he cooperated with the investigation 
and made records available to the investigators.8 
 
Applicant claimed that all the money that belonged to the golf association has 
been repaid. He indicated that he repaid the missing $3,100 in December 2007 and 
January 2008, but provided no documents to prove he made those payments. He also 
indicated that he was never charged with any criminal offenses because he repaid the 
money. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a credit report that showed he was 
meeting his current financial obligations.9  
 
Company X’s Investigation 
 
Company X partially funded the golf association. Because its funds were 
involved, Company X conducted an investigation into Applicant’s handling of the golf 
association’s funds. Pertinent findings of the investigation include:10 
 
a. The HR employee who was responsible for overseeing the finances of the 
company’s eight recreation clubs was interviewed. She reportedly told the investigator 
that Applicant advised her that he only moved $3,000 into his personal account, only 
owed $2,000, and was unable to repay the funds at that time. She also reportedly 
indicated that Applicant had been very defensive when board members asked to “see 
the books” and in some cases he refused.11 
 
b. There was only one bank fee that applied to the $10,000 cap. The bank would 
charge 70 cents on deposits when the account’s balance exceeded $10,000. The 
investigative report stated: 
 
[Applicant] said he never contacted [the bank] to independently verify the 
particular limits of the account nor any caps associated with it. [Applicant] 
was shown [golf association bank] account records from 2003, 2004, 
2005, 2006 and 2007, where an in depth month to month audit was 
                                                          
8 Tr. 29-39, 47-57; GE 2.  
9 Tr. 29-35, 37-40, 48, 55-61, 63-64; GE 2.  
10 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 7. 
11 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 8. 
 
5 
 
 
conducted with him with the help of investigators. The bank records 
indicated there were numerous instances over these years where the [golf 
association’s] account had exceeded a $10,000.00 balance. [Applicant] 
was unable to offer an explanation as to why during these times when the 
account was over the proposed limit the bank records indicated no 
obvious incurred fees or penalties which he had suggested were in place. 
In addition to there being no fees associated to the times the account 
exceeded the limit, there was also no record that any funds were 
withdrawn from the account by any employee including [Applicant] to 
reduce the balance to under the $10,000.00 mark during the previous 
years. In fact there were numerous times prior to 2007 that the account 
remained above $10,000.00 dollars. [Applicant] stated during his interview 
that during his time as Treasurer he balanced the [golf association’s] 
account on a monthly basis when he received the bank statements, and 
also prepared the required year end audit reports to [Company X]; but 
admittedly said he never once subtracted any fees or penalties associated 
with the account as it pertained to the claimed $10,000.00 dollar cap. 
Investigators found the statement to be odd that during the previous years 
of account reconciliation and year end audits that the Club Treasurer 
[Applicant], who prepared these reports, never deducted fees or had to 
account for line item audits associated with cap limit fees. When asked 
this direct question [Applicant] could offer no explanation. [Applicant] also 
offered no explanation as to why only the 2007 year budget was the only 
year money was needed to be withdrawn to maintain the integrity of the 
cap as he explained it.12 
 
c. Applicant provided his personal bank account records to the investigator. In 
February 2007, the beginning balance of Applicant’s personal bank account was a 
negative amount, i.e., -$37.34. On February 13 and 20, 2007, he transferred a total of 
$7,000 of the golf association’s funds into his personal account. For the three weeks 
following those deposits, he wrote several checks for personal purposes that reduced 
his account’s balance to $20.96. During that period, Applicant made no personal 
deposits to his account and none of the expended funds were used for golf association 
purposes.13  
 
d. In 2007, Applicant also transferred golf association funds into his personal 
account in February ($7,000), March ($300), April ($275), May ($300), June ($2,100), 
and July ($2,000). The June 2007 transfers apparently included Applicant cashing a 
counter check for $1,800 from the golf association’s account and depositing that money 
into a separate joint bank account that he maintained with his ex-wife. During 2007, the 
transfers from the golf association’s account into his personal accounts totaled $11,975. 
                                                          
12 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 9. 
13 Id. 
 
6 
 
 
While he did provide investigators records from his personal account, records from the 
joint account were not made available to investigators.14 
 
e. By the time the investigation was completed, Applicant made seven 
repayments of golf association funds in 2007. These repayments included three in 
August ($1,700, $300, and $2,000), two in September ($2,500 and $1,500), and two in 
October ($400 and $400). These repayments totaled $8,800, leaving a balance owed of 
$3,175. The repayments were made after the golf association account received 
“insufficient fund” notifications and the board of directors inquiries.15  
 
f. During the investigation, Applicant provided a written statement. It stated in 
part: 
 
. . . I never received nor did I ask for direction from other board members 
as to how to deal with the account once it reached the $10,000.00 dollar 
mark. 
 
During 2007, I began to have financial difficulties due to a strained 
marriage that ultimately ended in June 2007. During this time I used 
money that was taken from the [golf association’s] account to help me 
through the financial difficulties with the intentions of paying the money 
back. I have thoroughly reviewed the records with Investigator [D]. On Feb 
13th I deposited $5,000 dollars from the [golf association’s] account and 
then another $2,000 dollars on February 20, 2007 to my above listed 
personal . . . bank account. I used the money ($7,000) to pay personal 
bills to include: [specific companies] and other retail purchases. I distinctly 
remember during this month of one payment I made on Feb 27, 2007 from 
this account using [golf association] money to [his personal bank/credit 
card company] in the amount of $4,700 dollars. Throughout 2007, I made 
withdrawals from the [golf association] account and placed them in my 
[bank] account. On June 29, 2007, after my divorce, I wrote a counter 
check from the [golf association’s] account at [the bank’s location] for 
$1,800 dollars, which I deposited into the joint [bank] account that I have. 
This again was done not to steal money, but to help during a financial 
crisis with the intention of paying the money back to the account.16 
 
g. During the investigation, the president, former president, and another officer of 
the golf association were interviewed. Nothing was uncovered during those interviews 
that lead investigators to believe those officers knew or concurred in Applicant’s transfer 
of golf association funds into his personal accounts. The investigation noted, “This was 
                                                          
14 Id. 
15 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 10. 
16 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 10. 
 
7 
 
 
substantiated during [Applicant’s] interview by him stating that none of the club officers 
(former or current) knew that he was transferring money from the [golf association’s] 
account to his personal account .”17 
 
h. On February 11, 2008, Applicant was discharged from Company X. The 
personnel action documenting his termination indicated, “Theft at [Company X] will not 
be tolerated and as a result your employment is being terminated.” At the time of his 
termination, Company X records reflected that he still owed $3,175.18 
 
Character Evidence and Work Performance 
 
While serving in the Air Force, Applicant was awarded the Meritorious Service 
Medal, Air Force Commendation Medal with two oak leaf clusters, Air Force 
Achievement Medal, and Good Conduct Medal with one silver cluster. His annual 
performance review dated March 14, 2011, reflected that he received “Exceeds 
Expectations” or “Outstanding” grades for all evaluated categories. In a character letter, 
a coworker stated Applicant is “very honest, process-oriented, always acting in the best 
interest of the program, and extremely conscientious of the quality of the work he 
delivers.” Another former coworker described him as a great employee and wonderful 
person.19 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
                                                          
17 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 14. 
18 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3 at 1. 
19 AE A, B, E, F, H.  
 
8 
 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior. . .; 
 
* * * 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
As Treasurer of the [Company X] Employees Golf Association, Applicant was 
entrusted with golf association funds. He violated that trust by depositing golf 
association funds in his personal accounts and using those funds for personal 
purposes.  
 
Company X’s investigation contradicted several key aspects of Applicant’s 
testimony. Those contradictions include: 
 
 a. Applicant testified that, in about 2006, he informed the president of the golf 
association that he was placing golf association funds in his personal account to avoid 
bank fees. During the investigation, however, he reportedly stated that he never 
received or asked for direction from other board members on how to deal with the 
$10,000 cap. The former and current president and other board members of the golf 
association were interviewed during the investigation and nothing was uncovered during 
those interviews to lead the investigator to conclude that they knew or concurred in 
Applicant’s transferring of golf association funds into his personal account.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 b. Applicant testified that the transfer of golf association funds into his personal 
account was a common practice he engaged in while serving as its treasurer. In 
contrast, the investigation revealed that an in depth audit of the golf association’s 
account from 2003 to 2007 found no transfers of this nature occurred until 2007 even 
though the account’s balance exceeded $10,000 on numerous occasions before 2007.  
 
 c. Applicant testified that he never intended to use golf association funds for his 
personal purposes. During the investigation, he admitted that he was having financial 
problems and that he used money taken from the golf association’s account to help him 
through that difficult time with the intention of repaying it. In February 2007, he used 
about $7,000 of the golf association’s funds for his personal purposes.  
 
Company X’s investigation does not support Applicant’s contention that he 
transferred golf association funds into his account merely to avoid the $10,000 cap fees. 
I find that Applicant knowingly and intentionally misappropriated golf association funds 
for his personal purposes even though he may have intended to repay that money 
eventually. By engaging in that conduct, he breached his fiduciary duty. AG ¶¶16(c) and 
16(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists two personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant’s misappropriation of funds was not an isolated event, but occurred 
over a number of months. Although he was going through a divorce and experiencing 
financial difficulties when he misappropriated the funds, such circumstances do not 
mitigate his misconduct. This was a serious breach of trust that casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. At the hearing, he claimed he placed the 
golf association funds in his account to avoid the $10,000 cap fees. Company X’s 
investigation contradicts that claim and establishes that he took the funds for his 
personal purposes. This variance between his testimony and the investigation’s findings 
show that he has failed to accepted full responsibility for his misconduct, which raises 
questions about his reform and rehabilitation. Although his misconduct occurred over 
four years ago (February to July 2007), sufficient time has not passed to conclude his 
misconduct is unlikely to recur in the future. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply  
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other financial breaches of trust. 
 
 Company X’s investigation reflected that Applicant misappropriated $11,975 of 
the golf association’s funds. After this issue was uncovered by the board of directors, he 
repaid $8,800 of those funds from August to October 2007. Company X terminated his 
employment in February 2008. Company X’s records documenting his termination 
reflected that he still owed the remaining money ($3,175). At the hearing, he claimed 
that he repaid the remaining money and no criminal charges were brought against him 
because he repaid all of the money. Applicant’s claim is plausible. I find that AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) do not apply, but that AG ¶ 19(d) does apply. 
 
  One mitigating condition under AG ¶¶ 20 is potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Applicant is meeting his current financial obligations. Here, the financial concern 
does not arise from delinquent debts, but arises from a breach of financial trust, i.e., 
Applicant’s misappropriation of golf association funds. For the reasons set forth in the 
discussion above under Guideline E, Applicant also has failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Appellant served twenty years in the military and retired with an honorable discharge. 
He had held a security clearance while in the military and while working for defense 
contractors. His recent performance appraisal reflected that he received “Exceeds 
Expectations” or “Outstanding” grades in each performance category. Coworkers also 
speak highly of him. Nevertheless, Appellant has failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. His misappropriation of funds entrusted to him raises significant security 
concerns that have not been mitigated. From his testimony, it is apparent that he has 
not accepted full responsibility for his misconduct, but has attempted to minimize his 
wrongdoing. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Appellant has 
not mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Personal Conduct 
and Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
