 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00749 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing, 
(e-QIP), on June 3, 2010. On July 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under  
Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 27, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 17, 
2011. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on August 26, 2011. The 
case was transferred to me on October 25, 2011. On October 25, 2011, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for November 15, 2011. The hearing was 
held on that date. The Government offered Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 4, which 
were admitted without objection. The Government requested that administrative notice 
be taken of Gov 3 and 4. The documents were noted as administrative notice 
documents rather than exhibits.  Applicant testified and submitted nine exhibits which 
 
2 
 
 
were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - I without objection.  DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) of hearing on November 23, 2011. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Canada 
 
Canada is a constitutional monarchy with a federal system, a parliamentary 
government, and a democratic tradition dating from the late 18th century. The 
relationship between the United States and Canada is among the closest and most 
extensive in the world. It is reflected in the volume of bilateral trade – the equivalent of 
$1.6 billion a day in goods – as well as in people to people contact. About 300,000 
people cross the border every day. (Gov 3) 
 
 U.S. defense arrangements with Canada are more extensive than any other 
country. The Permanent Joint Board on Defense, established in 1940, provides policy-
level consultation on bilateral defense matters and the United States and Canada share 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) mutual security commitments. In addition, 
U.S. and Canadian forces have cooperated since 1958 on continental air defense within 
the framework of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). The 
military response to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States both 
tested and strengthened military cooperation between the United States and Canada. 
(Gov 3) 
 
United Kingdom 
 
The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy. The United Kingdom is a 
founding member of NATO. The United Kingdom is one of the United States’ closest 
allies, and British foreign policy emphasizes close coordination with the United States. 
Bilateral cooperation reflects the common language, ideals, and democratic practices of 
the two nations.  Relations were strengthened by the United Kingdom’s alliance with the 
United States during both World Wars, in the Korean conflict, in the Persian Gulf War, in 
Operation Iraqi Freedom, and in Afghanistan, as well as its role as a founding member 
of NATO. The United Kingdom and the United States continually consult on foreign 
policy issues and global problems and share major foreign and security policy 
objectives. (Gov 4) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old export trade officer employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor. She has worked for the same employer since October 2006. She 
 
3 
 
 
has a bachelor’s degree in Business Administration. This is her first time applying for a 
security clearance. She is single and has no children. (Tr. 11-12, 27, 37; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Canada. She is also a citizen of the United 
Kingdom based on the fact that her mother was born in the United Kingdom and is a 
citizen of the United Kingdom. She and her mother immigrated to the United States in 
1993 when she was 16. She attended high school and college in the United States. She 
became a U.S. citizen in September 2008. She was issued a U.S. passport on 
November 19, 2008. Applicant disclosed that she held valid Canadian and United 
Kingdom passports in response to section 20B on her e-QIP application, dated June 3, 
2010. Her Canadian passport was issued on July 31, 2007, and has an expiration date 
of July 31, 2012. Her United Kingdom passport was issued on November 17, 2004 and 
has an expiration date of November 17, 2014. (Tr. 11, 27-28, 31; Gov 1; Gov 2; AE I) 
 
In response to interrogatories, dated April 28, 2011, Applicant indicated that she 
has several relatives in the United Kingdom and that she may one day wish to retire 
there. In a letter dated October 27, 2010, Applicant sent a letter to the Defense 
Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) in response to the denial of her interim 
security clearance. She indicated that she did not understand why DISCO was asking 
her to destroy her Canadian and United Kingdom passports. She did not want to do this 
because each passport is the property of the respective governments and she was 
concerned that she would break the law by destroying the passport. She also did not 
understand the need to destroy the Canadian passport since Canada was a strong ally 
and immediate neighbor of the United States. (Gov 2)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant explained that she was unaware and confused 
regarding the policy prohibiting a person from holding a valid foreign passport while 
being granted access to classified information. Once she became informed on the 
policy, she was willing to surrender her foreign passports. On November 14, 2011, she 
surrendered her Canadian and United Kingdom passports to her Facility Security Officer 
(FSO). The FSO provided a letter verifying that Applicant surrendered her Canadian 
and United Kingdom passports to her office. (Tr. 13, 34-35; AE A) 
 
Applicant considers herself an American. While she has relatives in both Canada 
and the United Kingdom, she has no allegiance to either country. She has never voted 
in either country. She owns no property in either country. She has no financial accounts 
in either country. She loves living in the United States. (Tr. 29, 33, 36)  
 
After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008, Applicant has not traveled using the 
Canadian or United Kingdom passports. In September 2011, she traveled to Ireland 
using her U.S. passport. She does not intend to move back to Canada or to retire in 
Canada. She has no plans to move to the United Kingdom. While, she has considered 
retiring in the United Kingdom, she changed her mind because of the high cost of living 
in the United Kingdom. (Tr. 27, 30-32; AE I)   
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant understands the importance of safekeeping national secrets. She 
considers herself to be honest, reliable, and law abiding. (Tr. 26) In 2007, she received 
her company’s President’s Award for outstanding performance and customer 
satisfaction. On January 21, 2010, she received her green belt certification from her 
company’s Value Based Six Sigma program. (AE G; AE H)  
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor states that Applicant is a valued asset within 
her team. She has brilliant leadership skills. They would like to involve Applicant in more 
complicated defense programs. Applicant has been instrumental in setting and leading 
various programs and executes her job responsibilities with commitment, honesty, and 
flair. She highly recommends her for a security clearance. (AE B) Other employees also 
attest to Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and dependability. (AE C – AE F)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be used when evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion  to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
  
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. In Applicant’s case, AG ¶10(a)(1) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport) applies. Applicant possessed a valid Canadian and a valid United Kingdom 
passport.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Preference. The following Foreign Preference Mitigating 
Conditions apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country); and  
 
AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated).  
 
Applicant mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns. She was born in Canada 
and gained citizenship by virture of her birth in that country. Her United Kingdom 
citizenship was acquired from her mother who is a citizen of the United Kingdom. Once 
she learned of the security significance of possessing valid foreign passports, she 
surrendered both passports to her FSO. She never traveled on either passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008. Applicant mitigated concerns under Guideline C. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is well 
respected at her place of employment. I found her to be sincere, conscientious, and 
trustworthy during the hearing. She surrendered her Canadian and United Kingdom 
passports to her FSO. I considered that Applicant has lived in the U.S. since she was 16 
years old. She attended high school and college in the United States. She did not use 
either her Canadian or United Kingdom passports after becoming a U.S. citizen. She 
does not vote in either country, owns no foreign property, and has no foreign bank 
accounts. While she has relatives in Canada and the United Kingdom, the majority of 
her ties are in the United States where she has lived for the past 18 years. Canada and 
the United Kingdom are close allies of the United States. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. Foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
     
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                              
   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
 Administrative Judge 
