 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02490 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 9, 2009. On July 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On August 13, 2011, Applicant answered the 
 
2 
 
 
SOR and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
October 11, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the file of relevant material (FORM) 
that contained Items 1 through 9. A copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
October 12, 2011. She was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to 
submit any objections and information in mitigation or extenuation. Within the allotted 
time period, she submitted additional information that was marked as Item 10. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on November 29, 2011. Items 1 through 10 are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since June 2009. Information contained in the FORM indicates 
that she graduated from high school in September 1977 and obtained an associate’s 
degree in January 1985. She married in March 1994 and has two children, ages 16 and 
33 years old. She has not served in the U.S. military. In 1983, her background was 
investigated for a security clearance.1 
 
The SOR lists three delinquent debts totaling $21,486. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted each of the alleged debts with explanations. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant attributes the delinquent debts to medical problems and a period of 
unemployment. In late 2006, she underwent surgery for a brain tumor. As a result of 
that operation, she suffered blood clots that resulted in two additional surgeries. She 
was forced to take a long-term leave of absence. During that absence, she initially 
received full pay under an insurance policy, but those payments decreased and 
eventually expired. The date her insurance payments terminated is unknown. Following 
her surgeries, her husband also started working part time so that he could care for her. 
While on the leave of absence, her section at work underwent a reduction in force and 
she was laid off. As a result of their reduced income, she and her husband were unable 
to meet their financial obligations. Her e-QIP reflected that she was unemployed from 
December 2006 to September 2008. Since returning to work, she has been employed in 
two jobs. The first job ended when she was laid off in May 2009. Shortly thereafter, she 
began working for her current employer. Her husband was unable to secure full-time 
work until December 2009.3 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 5. Regarding her associate’s degree, Applicant’s e-QIP indicates she attended college from 
January 1985 to February 1990. Consequently, her associate’s degree may have been awarded in 
February 1990. 
 
2 Items 1 and 4.  
 
3 Items 5 and 6 at 9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
The alleged debts are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account of $5,977. This is a charge account. The date of 
last activity on this account was November 2008. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
indicated that she intended to communicate with the collection agency to reach a 
settlement agreement. In her response to the FORM, she stated that she was still 
negotiating with the collection agency. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account of $9,849. This is a credit card account. The date 
of last activity on this account was September 2009. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant indicated that she sent the collection agency a hardship letter explaining her 
illness and period of unemployment. In her response to the FORM, she stated that the 
collection agency was not interested in working with her on the debt and obtained a 
judgment against her. The judgment was issued on August 25, 2011, in the amount of 
$9,849, plus $128 in court costs, and accrues interest at a yearly rate of 4.25 percent. 
She indicated that $128 of her wages was going to be garnished from her weekly 
paychecks. She submitted a letter from an attorney representing the collection agency 
that demanded payment of the judgment and indicated that, if payment was not made 
within ten days, her wages would be garnished. No documents were submitted that 
show a garnishment has been instituted. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account of $5,642. This is a credit card account. The date 
of last activity on this account was September 2008. In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant indicated that she negotiated a settlement with the creditor in May 2011 and 
has been paying $98 per month under that agreement. She provided documents 
showing that she has authorized the creditor to automatically debit her account for those 
monthly payments. The documents also show she made payments of $98 on June 12, 
2011; July 12, 2011; August 12, 2011; and October 12, 2011. She provided sufficient 
information to establish that this debt is being resolved.6 
 
In her interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on 
January 1, 2010, Applicant indicated that her husband had a history of 
methamphetamine use dating back roughly 20 years, but was drug free for a number of 
years. In January 2009, he locked himself in a room in their home and refused to come 
out. She suspected he was using drugs again and called 911. Before the police arrived, 
she banged on the door with a hammer. Her husband opened the door and some 
pushing occurred between them. When the police arrived, her husband was arrested for 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 4, 8, and 10. 
 
5 Id. In her OPM interview, Applicant indicated that she had a repayment program with the creditor for four 
months and was paying $56 per month towards this debt. She provided no proof of those payments. See 
Item 6 at 10. 
 
6 Items 1, 4, 8, and 10.  
 
 
4 
 
 
possession of illegal drugs and she was arrested for criminal damage. The charge 
against her was apparently dropped after she attended an anger management course 
and paid fees. Her husband resolved the charge against him by pleading guilty to a 
reduced charge. At the time of the interview, she indicated that she did not believe he 
was currently using drugs, but worried he might start again.7 
 
During her OPM interview, Applicant stated that she is working to resolve all of 
her financial problems and intended to satisfy her debts. She indicated that she has 
always lived within her means and had outstanding credit before her illness. She does 
not believe that she will have any future financial problems. In her response to 
interrogatories in May 2011, she submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that 
reflected she had a net monthly income of $2,204 (weekly salary of $551 times 4), total 
monthly expenses of $800, and total monthly debt payments of $1,293, resulting in a 
net remainder of $111. In the PFS, the monthly debt payments did not include payments 
towards the alleged debts. The PFS also indicated that her husband was not working at 
that time.8 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated she has worked for defense 
contractors for the past 32 years. During most of that time, she held a security 
clearance. In her OPM interview, she described herself as a law-abiding citizen. She 
has not submitted any reference letters or work performance appraisals. I was unable to 
evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person because she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
                                                          
7 Items 6 at 10-11, and 9. 
 
8 Items 6 at 9. 
 
 
5 
 
 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts totaling over $21,000 that she was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
In 2006, Applicant had surgery for a brain tumor and thereafter had two other 
surgeries for blood clots. While recuperating, she was laid off from her job. Her husband 
began working part time to care for her. Her medical problems and unemployment were 
conditions beyond her control that caused her financial problems. For AG ¶ 20(b) to fully 
apply, however, an individual must act responsibly under the circumstances. Since 
September 2008, Applicant has been employed full-time except for a short period in 
which she was laid off in May-June 2008. Since returning to work, she has not provided 
any proof of payments on the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.b. In her Answer to the SOR, 
she indicated that she would take step towards resolving those debts, but provided no 
proof of any meaningful action to settle them. From the documents she presented, it 
 
7 
 
 
appears she only started making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c after she had her 
OPM interview. Based on these circumstances, I cannot conclude that she has acted in 
a financially responsible manner since returning to work or that the delinquent debts do 
not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find that AG 
¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially applicable, but do not fully mitigate the security 
concerns arising from her delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant has not presented any proof that she received financial counseling. In 
May 2001, she entered into an agreement to settle the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. Since then, 
she has been making payments under that agreement. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply to 
SOR ¶ 1.c, but not to the remaining debts.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant found herself in a difficult financial situation due to her illness and 
period of unemployment. During that period, her husband also began working part time 
to care for her. Despite such mitigation, her financial problems remain a security 
concern. According to her PFS, she is barely meeting her current financial obligations. 
At this point, it is unknown whether two of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 
totaling $15,826) will be resolved. In the absence of a realistic plan for resolving those 
debts, insufficient evidence has been presented to conclude that her financial problems 
are behind her. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a – 1b:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1c:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
