 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00188 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 28, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 16, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 8, 2011. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 25, 2011, scheduling the case for August 25, 2011. The 
 
2 
 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented Exhibits (AE) A through G (the 
letter E was unintentionally omitted when naming the documents), which were admitted 
without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information until September 6, 2011. Applicant submitted AE H through K, which were 
admitted without objection, post hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 6, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 
1.j. He failed to admit or deny 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2010. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in finance 
in 2002. He is divorced and has one child from his prior marriage. Applicant currently 
lives with his parents. (Tr. 36-39.) 
 
 As listed on the SOR, Applicant is indebted to ten creditors in the approximate 
total amount of $20,522. He contracted with a debt settlement company in 2009. 
However, the company is not a debt consolidation firm. He calls the company when he 
has saved up some money on his own and has them attempt to negotiate with creditors 
one at a time. Applicant no longer uses credit cards. He has not received any financial 
counseling or education. (GE 4; Tr. 54, 62-65.) His debts are as follows. 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a judgment filed against him in November 2007 for the 
approximate amount of $1,926. Applicant testified that this debt was for jewelry he 
purchased. At the time of the hearing, this debt was still outstanding. Applicant has 
failed to address this debt. (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on an account that has been past-due since 2006 in the 
approximate amount of $322. Applicant testified that he does not know how this debt 
was incurred nor is he aware of the current status of this debt. According to Applicant’s 
credit reports, this debt is still outstanding. (GE 5;Tr. 49.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a bank on a charged-off account in the approximate 
amount of $1,971. This debt has been past due since 2005. Applicant testified at 
hearing that he intended to settle this account within two days of the hearing. He 
presented a letter dated July 18, 2011, from this creditor that offered to settle this debt 
for $1,000. He also presented a Client Settlement Agreement that a debt settlement 
company helped him obtain with this creditor. However, he failed to provide proof that 
he made his promised payment to this creditor. (GE 5; AE C; AE K; Tr. 53.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted a collection agent for a bank in the approximate amount of 
$6,146. This debt has been past due since 2010. Applicant presented a settlement 
letter, dated June 15, 2011, offering to settle this debt for a payment of $3,566. 
 
3 
 
Applicant presented a copy of his bank statement showing a check for this amount was 
drawn on his account on June 30, 2011. This was the first account Applicant settled with 
the help of the debt settlement company. (GE 4; AE B; AE J; Tr. 65.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a bank in the approximate amount of $4,055. This 
account has been delinquent since 2009. Applicant presented a Client Settlement 
Agreement that a debt settlement company helped him obtain with this creditor. It 
indicates the creditor would accept payment of $1,217 to settle this debt in full. 
Applicant presented a copy of his bank statement that displayed a $1,000 check drawn 
on Applicant’s account on June 6, 2011, and a $217 withdrawal from the collection 
agent on June 7, 2011, as proof of payment. (GE 4; AE B; AE C; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent in the approximate amount of $2,175. 
This debt appears to be a duplicate of the judgment, discussed above. It remains 
unpaid. (GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a department store in the approximate amount of $170. 
This debt has been past due since 2006. Applicant failed to present documentation 
showing that he is addressing this debt. This debt is still outstanding. (GE 4; Tr. 55.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a cell phone company in the 
approximate amount of $601. This debt has been past due since 2006. Applicant claims 
this debt is satisfied. He presented documentation from two different cell phone 
companies addressing payments on another account, but failed to present documents 
that reflected this debt has been satisfied. (AE I; Tr. 55.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a department store in the 
approximate amount of $1,491. Applicant indicated that this debt should have been 
satisfied by his ex-wife. Applicant’s credit report reflects “account paid for less than full 
balance.” This debt has been settled. (GE 4; Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a medical account if the approximate amount of $1,665. 
Applicant believes this debt should be his ex-wife’s responsibility. She provides health 
insurance for their son; however, she refused to give the hospital the insurance 
information when Applicant sought treatment for their son. This account has been past 
due since at least June 2010. (GE 4; Tr. 57.) 
 
 Since 2006, Applicant has taken vacations to Germany, Aruba, and traveled 
twice to Spain. He indicated that the trips were largely paid for by his friend who used 
airline and hotel miles to pay for airfare and lodging, although he spent $500-$600 in 
spending money himself. (Tr. 57-61.) 
 
 Despite Applicant’s indebtedness, he answered, “No,” on his January 4, 2008 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), when he was asked: 
“Section 26. Your Financial Delinquencies  e. Have you ever had a judgment entered 
against you?; g. Have you had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency(s)?; 
h. Have you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for 
 
4 
 
failing to pay as agreed?; m. Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?; 
n. Have you been over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He testified he did not know 
why he failed to list his debts on the e-QIP. (Tr. 61.) 
  
 Applicant is well respected by his co-workers. The Director of Applicant’s 
department indicated “During his employment with us, he has become an invaluable 
technical asset to our team and this organization.” (AE A; AE D.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns for Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated nine delinquent debts (one debt was listed twice), totaling 
$18,596, and has been unable or unwilling to pay the majority of these obligations. His 
delinquencies have been ongoing for several years, without resolution. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to present sufficient documentation that he has satisfied the 
majority of his delinquent debts listed on the SOR. While he has addressed two of his 
delinquent accounts and a third was apparently settled by his ex-wife, Applicant remains 
indebted to six other creditors. His debt is current and ongoing. Further, he gave little 
indication that his financial situation is likely to improve. His inability to address these 
debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant failed to present evidence that the conditions that resulted in his financial 
problem were largely beyond his control. Further, he has not acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He took several vacations spending $500-$600 at a time, while 
ignoring small debts of $170 and $322 that had been delinquent for a number of years. 
While he has recently begun repayment of some of his delinquent accounts, not enough 
time has passed to demonstrate that he will not face similar problems in the future. 
Further, Applicant has not shown he made any attempt to responsibly address his 
remaining six debts. Applicant has not sought financial counseling. There is no showing 
he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay these overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts. Finally, he failed to introduce documented proof to substantiate the basis of any 
disputes with his creditors or provide evidence of actions he has taken to resolve the 
issue with his creditors. No mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
7 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose his debt in his answers to the January 4, 2008 e-QIP. 
He should have been aware that he had a significant amount of delinquent debt at the 
time he completed his e-QIP, however, he failed to list any delinquent accounts and 
affirmatively denied their existence. At hearing, he was unable to explain his omission. I 
find he deliberately omitted his debts from his January 4, 2008 e-QIP. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct his falsifications. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-advised in 
completing his answers on the e-QIP. Falsifying information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, he fails to take responsibility for his actions. He has not provided information in 
this record to meet his burden of proof to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
personal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s letter of commendation and certificates show he is a valued 
employee. However, he has been unable to make ends meet and satisfy his past due 
accounts. His choices, with respect to his debts, do not demonstrate the judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. Applicant earned a 
finance degree in 2002, yet he has failed to practice sound financial judgment in his 
personal affairs. Further, his falsifications leave one to question his reliability. There are 
significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
