 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03901 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
The evidence fails to establish some disqualifying conduct and Applicant 
mitigated the remaining security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on August 2, 2011, with a hearing date of August 26, 2011. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit 
index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) III.1 Applicant testified and offered exhibit 
(AE) A that was admitted into the record without any objection. The record was left open 
for Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AE B and C. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 12, 2011.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to change the erroneous case 
number from 09-01391 to 11-03901. Applicant raised no objection and the motion was 
granted. Department Counsel also informed me that he was not offering any evidence 
to support the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.b. I indicated that I would rule in favor of 
Applicant on that allegation.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied the allegations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He is legally separated and has two adult children. He 
works for his own company who does business as a defense contractor. From 2000 to 
2006, he worked for a defense contractor and held a top secret clearance. He holds a 
bachelor’s degree in business management. He served in the Army from 1980 to 2001 
and held a top secret security clearance. He served in combat on two different 
occasions, during Desert Storm and in Bosnia. He retired as a master sergeant (E-8) 
and received an honorable discharge.3   
  
 The sole allegation that the Government is offering proof on alleges Applicant 
was terminated for misconduct from his defense contractor position because he filed a 
false claim for travel expenses and a false trip report on June 12, 2009, for a business 
trip he took (SOR ¶ 1.a).  
  
                                                          
1 Hearing exhibits (HE) I and II were offered by Department Counsel to show that Applicant’s case was 
originally listed under a different case number (09-01391) which was closed for non-sponsorship. 
Subsequently, Applicant gained new employment from a company who is sponsoring him for this 
clearance. See Tr. at 15-16. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-17. 
 
3 Tr. at 5-6, 36-38, 58; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant began working for a defense contractor in January 2009. His duties 
included working as a project manager overseeing several service contracts for which 
he reported directly to his first line supervisor (Mr. E). Applicant describes his 
relationship with Mr. E as difficult because he viewed Mr. E as either non-approachable 
or non-informative when he was approachable. Because of this, Applicant was left with 
many questions about his duties that he sought answers from other tenured employees. 
Applicant’s position required him to travel off site to administer the service contracts for 
which he was responsible. One of the projects he was responsible for required him to 
travel to another location to attend a conference May 12-14, 2009. He made the proper 
request for travel and the trip was approved by his supervisory chain of command. He 
traveled to the conference the day before it started. The next day when he attempted to 
gain admittance to the conference, he was turned away because his registration was 
not received and his security clearance could not be verified. He tried to remedy the 
situation by calling the point of contact for the conference, but was not able to contact 
anyone. He also tried to register on-line, but was also unsuccessful in this attempt. He 
went back to his hotel room and worked on other work he brought with him. He did not 
let Mr. E know what had happened, nor did he contact anyone else at his home 
location. He tried to gain admittance the next day, but was turned down again for the 
same reason.4  
 
 Applicant returned home as scheduled having never attended any of the 
conference. Once back to his home location, he did not inform Mr. E or anyone else that 
he had not attended the conference. Applicant prepared and submitted a travel expense 
report for his trip. In that report, he claimed his airfare, lodging, meals and other 
expenses for his trip. On the line of the report marked “Business Purpose”, he stated the 
following: “Attend 2009 (redacted name of course) Summit, 12-14 May 2009.” He did 
not note on the report that he did not actually attend the course because of the 
registration issue. Sometime after he submitted the travel report, questions arose about 
whether he attended the course. His second level supervisor, an Air Force Colonel, 
asked him directly if he had attended the course and Applicant responded with a no 
answer. The Colonel asked no further questions and Applicant did not give any further 
explanation. He was terminated the next day. The money he was paid for his expenses 
from the trip was taken out of his final pay so that the company was not out any money 
from his trip.5  
 
 When asked why he did not inform anyone about his inability to gain admittance 
to the conference, Applicant responded that he did not think it would help him. He said 
he really did not know what to do. Part of the reason for his reluctance to let his 
supervisor know what was happening was because of the difficult relationship he had 
with Mr. E. This relationship was referred to by a coworker of Applicant who verified the 
strained relationship between the two.6 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 45-52; GE 2-3. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Tr. at 53, 55; AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant presented a letter of appreciation and performance reports from his 
Army career. They reflect professional service, leadership, high integrity, and 
outstanding performance over the course of his career.7  
 
 No evidence was offered by the Government in support of SOR allegation ¶ 1.b. 
Therefore, I find in favor of Applicant on this allegation. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 AE B-C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s filing of a travel expense report without explaining that he was not 
able to attend the conference and his failure to inform his supervisors at the time calls 
into question his judgment and created a vulnerability to exploitation. AG ¶ 16(d) and (e) 
apply to SOR ¶ 1a. 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 Applicant’s action in not promptly reporting his non-attendance at the conference 
that his company paid for and his subsequent filing of an expense report for the 
conference was an anomaly when compared to his outstanding Army record. His poor 
decision was affected by the poor working relationship he had with his supervisor. This 
happened under unique circumstances and is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s outstanding 
Army career supports his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
applies. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s relationship 
with his supervisor and that this was a one-time event. I also considered that he no 
longer works for the same company. I considered his outstanding military service, 
including his two combat tours. Applicant met his burden and provided sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    For APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
