1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------, ------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11006
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant committed driving under the influence (DUI) offenses in 1984, 1990,
1996, and 2006. He was convicted of marijuana possession in 1986, and was
discharged from the Navy for drug abuse in 1989. He has abstained from drug use
since 1990, and from alcohol use since January 2006. He has changed his lifestyle and
is committed to sobriety. Applicant is making significant progress but, given his long
history of substance abuse, insufficient time has passed since his last relapse to
demonstrate permanent behavioral change. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigation Processing
(e-QIP), on May 1, 2007. On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines G, H, E, and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
2
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 12, 2007. He
answered the SOR in writing, undated, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge. DOHA received that request on January 14, 2008. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 25, 2008, and the case was assigned to
me on January 28, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 4, 2008, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 22, 2008. The Government offered
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. The Government also
offered Administrative Notice (AN) exhibits 1 and 2, two sections of the Controlled
Substances Act of 1970, to support a request that I take administrative notice of the fact
that marijuana is a controlled substance. Applicant had no objection, and administrative
notice of this fact was taken. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted
exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s wife also
testified for him. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 3, 2008.
While reviewing the evidence, I noticed that the first page of GE 1 was the signature
page from another applicant’s e-QIP, that was mistakenly substituted for Applicant’s
signature page. Department Counsel obtained and provided the correct page, which I
appended to the record, together with accompanying email correspondence, as Hearing
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant offered no objection, and the record was reopened on
Department Counsel’s motion, to substitute the correct signature page into GE 1. The
original remains attached to that exhibit to ensure that the record is complete, but is not
otherwise material to this decision.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations concerning
alcohol consumption, drug involvement, and criminal conduct, and denied deliberately
failing to disclose some of his DUI and drug offenses on his e-QIP under personal
conduct. Applicant’s admissions, including those contained in his response to DOHA
Interrogatories (GE 3), are incorporated in the following findings.
Applicant is a 40-year-old computer technician employed by a major defense
contractor. Except for a year of unemployment and ten months with another company,
he has worked for his present employer since 1996. He was recently promoted into his
present position, and his recent performance evaluations are good. (AE B.) He has
never held a security clearance.
In 1984, when he was 16 years old, Applicant was charged and convicted of
Underage Drinking and Driving. He was fined, had his license suspended, and was
required to attend an alcohol awareness class. In January 1986, while still in high
school, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana. He paid a $40 fine
for this offense. After graduating, he joined the Navy in August 1986. He used marijuana
3
several times with other Sailors during his enlistment. After testing positive on a
urinalysis test, he was awarded non-judicial punishment, and separated with an other-
than-honorable discharge for misconduct-drug abuse in August 1989. (Tr. at 58-60.)
Applicant smoked marijuana a few more times after leaving the service, but has
not done so since October 14,1990. (Tr. at 66-67.) On that date, he was arrested for
DUI. He pled guilty to that offense, served a week in jail, had his license suspended for
a year, and was ordered to complete a two-year intensive outpatient treatment program.
(Tr. at 48-50.) He was arrested for DUI again in 1996. He obtained a deferred
prosecution on condition that he satisfactorily complete another two-year intensive
outpatient treatment program, which he did. 
Applicant resumed drinking in late 2005. He was arrested again for DUI on
January 12, 2006, after wrecking his car in a single-car accident. He had been drinking
whiskey at home, before driving to a fast-food restaurant. His blood-alcohol level was
more than three times the legal limit. He was convicted of this offense in May 2006, and
sentenced to five days in jail, a $1,121 fine, 40 days of home monitoring, and
suspension of his driver’s license. He was also ordered to participate in another
intensive outpatient treatment program. He completed this program, with a favorable
prognosis from his program counselor, in December 2006. (AE A.) Since this last
treatment, he has changed his lifestyle, and married his wife who is fully supporting his
ongoing abstinence. He is also receiving ongoing follow-up counseling. (AE C; AE D; Tr.
at 54-58, 69-72, 74-78.)
When Applicant completed his e-QIP security clearance application, he answered
“Yes” to question 23.d, concerning whether he had ever been charged with or convicted
of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. In the section seeking details concerning
affirmative answers about his police record, he listed his January 2006 DUI offense, but
none of the earlier offenses noted above. During an interview with an OPM investigator
on June 20, 2007, however, he volunteered what information he could recall about the
three earlier DUI offenses. He testified very credibly that he had no intention of
concealing the earlier convictions, which he was certain the Government would have
access to. He misunderstood that this particular question was not limited to the past
seven years, like many of the other questions.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.” AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying. The disqualifying condition asserted by the Government in
this case is: “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent.”
5
Applicant has four DUI convictions over the past 23 years, starting at age 16. His
most recent conviction was just over two years ago, in January 2006, and involved
blood-alcohol levels more than three times the legal limit. He attended an alcohol
awareness class after his first conviction, and intensive outpatient treatment programs
after each of the last three. There were six years between his first three DUIs, and ten
years between the third and fourth. The Government has established security concerns
under this guideline.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
¶ 23(a) does not provide mitigation because Applicant’s DUI offenses have been
frequent and the latest one was fairly recent. Both the pattern and the recency of this
last incident continue to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and good judgment. His
history of relapses after court-ordered treatment programs also precludes mitigation
under ¶ 23(c). He has acknowledged his alcoholism, changed his lifestyle, and began a
period of abstinence following his January 2006 arrest.  He also completed his most
recent outpatient treatment program successfully, and received a favorable prognosis
from the social worker who served as his program counselor. These efforts do generate
some mitigation of security concerns under ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d). 
6
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: “Use of
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.” AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. Disqualifying conditions raised by the SOR allegations include: “(a) any
drug abuse;” and “(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”
Applicant was fined for marijuana possession when he was a high school senior
in 1986. He also used marijuana several times from 1986 to 1990, during and shortly
after his naval service. He was discharged under other-than-honorable conditions for
drug use. The Government established facts necessary to raise security concerns under
this guideline.
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Mitigating
conditions supported on this record include:“(a) the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;” and “(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”
Applicant’s drug possession and use occurred more than 18 years ago, and primarily
with high school or service friends. He was an occasional user, and he no longer
associates with drug users. Applicant established substantial mitigation of drug
involvement security concerns.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The disqualifying condition alleged in this case is:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
7
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant credibly denied that he intentionally omitted information about his pre-
1998 criminal charges related to alcohol and drugs on his e-QIP. His explanation of
confusion based on the “last 7 years” limitation on other questions concerning these
incidents was reasonable. Moreover, AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate
personal conduct security concerns, including “(a) the individual made prompt, good-
faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being
confronted with the facts.” Applicant volunteered the information about the earlier DUI
offenses to the OPM investigator, further demonstrating the absence of any intent to
conceal them and mitigating any security concerns raised by the initial omission.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying. Disqualifying conditions asserted by the Government were:
“(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and “(c) allegation or admission
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted.” The crimes alleged in the SOR include Applicant’s four DUI
convictions, his drug possession conviction, and falsification of his e-QIP in violation of
10 U.S.C. § 1001. Applicant admitted to commission of all but this latter offense. As
discussed above, the evidence does not establish that he deliberately falsified his e-
QIP. The other criminal offenses do raise security concerns, however.
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Applicant’s
recent sobriety, completion of an outpatient treatment program, good work performance,
and lifestyle changes create some mitigation under two of them: “(a) so much time has
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and, “(d) there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”
Some of Applicant’s criminal conduct occurred many years ago, but his criminal
history must be evaluated as a whole, not piece by piece. All of his crimes have
involved illegal substance abuse, and were indicative of poor judgment and a lack of
self-control, as well as a willingness to flaunt rules and regulations. With another relapse
and serious drunk driving conviction just over two years ago, Applicant did not establish
strong mitigation of the concerns arising from his criminal history. He suffered relapses
resulting in additional DUI convictions six and ten years after his first two intensive
8
outpatient treatment programs, leading to the conclusion that it is still too soon, since he
completed his most recent treatment, to be confident that such behavior is unlikely to
recur, and no longer casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances established by the record evidence. The
Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG
¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involved a pattern of recurring substance-abuse related offenses including a
fairly recent and serious DUI offense. He successfully completed post-conviction
treatment programs after each offense, but suffered subsequent relapses. His earliest
offenses occurred when he was young and immature, but his more recent convictions
took place when he was mature and fully responsible for his choices. He mitigated
security concerns arising solely from his drug abuse many years ago, but did not
mitigate their impact as part of a larger pattern of criminal behavior.
There is no evidence that Applicant was pressured to commit any offense by
anything beyond normal life pressures to which he remains subject. He has made
positive lifestyle changes, and gained a very positive influence in his recent marriage to
his very supportive wife. His behavior and good work performance since January 2006
create an excellent start on building a record of more responsible and trustworthy
conduct, and provide a sound basis on which to build eligibility for a security clearance
in the future. The number and recency of relapses, however, preclude a present
judgment that Applicant has met his burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by
the undisputed evidence in this record. 
9
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from alcohol
consumption and criminal conduct considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 4.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
