1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 14-05641 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns generated by his delinquent debt 
and his failure to disclose it on his security clearance application, as required. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 21, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct, explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On April 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 
1.f, 2.a, and 2.b, and denying the remaining allegations. He requested a decision based on 
the administrative record instead of a hearing. On March 7, 2016, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on March 14, 
2016, and was notified of his opportunity to file a response within 30 days of receipt. He did 
not respond. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AGs supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 6 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on March 18, 2015. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 63-year-old married man with one adult child. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 1981 and a bachelor’s degree in 1991. Applicant worked for the 
same employer for 33 years, from 1973 to 2006, but was compelled to retire abruptly after 
his employer announced plans to close the factory where he worked. He remained retired 
for four years through 2010 before taking a job as a custodian. Since 2013, he has worked 
for a defense contractor as a plumber. (Item 3 at 10-13) 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debt totaling approximately $65,000, as alleged in the 
SOR. All of the alleged delinquent debts are supported by record evidence (Items 4 and 5). 
Applicant contends his financial problems corresponded with his abrupt retirement in 2006 
and the death of his wife, whose income had helped him make ends meet. (Item 2 at 1) 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that he has paid or formally disputed any of the 
debts, nor has he provided any other evidence of steps taken to resolve the delinquencies. 
In addition, Applicant failed to provide relevant, material information about his personal 
finances, as requested on Section 26 of his security clearance application, executed in 
June 2013. He admitted the allegations, but did not provide any explanation. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
 Applicant’s SOR delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to an abrupt retirement in 2006 after 
the factory where he had worked for 33 years closed, together with the death of his wife, 
whose income he had needed to help make ends meet. However, the record does not 
reflect any subsequent actions taken to pay, dispute, or otherwise resolve the debts. Under 
these circumstances, none of the mitigating conditions apply. I conclude Applicant has 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.” (AG ¶ 
15) Applicant’s admitted falsifications trigger the applicability of AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” Applicant 
provided no explanation for deliberately failing to disclose any of his delinquent debts on 
5 
 
his security clearance application, as required. Consequently, he has failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I have considered the whole-person factors in my adjudication of the relevant 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and they do not warrant a favorable conclusion. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
