KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Regarding Applicant’s claim that he would have chosen a hearing if he had understood
what would be presented to the Judge. Applicant received the FORM which consisted of a
Department Counsel memo and accompanying evidence.  Both the FORM and the cover letter
clearly stated that the contents of the FORM would be presented to the Judge for his
consideration and that Applicant could submit a response setting forth objections or anything
else he wanted to present.  There is no reason to believe that Applicant was mis-advised about
the evidence the Judge would consider, nor that Applicant’s choice of an administrative
determination was other than knowing and intelligent.  Although pro se applicants are not held to
the standards of lawyers, they are expected to take reasonable steps to protect their rights. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07237.a1
DATE: 02/12/2018
DATE: February 12, 2018
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07237
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 29, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 27, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant has worked for Defense contractors since 2005 and has held a clearance since
2007.  He experienced unemployment from late 2009 to January 2010.  Applicant’s SOR listed
numerous delinquent debts.  The Judge resolved five of them against him–four credit card accounts
and a medical bill.  The credit card debts had been charged off.  Applicant claimed that he may have
paid off the medical bill, but he provided no corroboration.  Applicant did not submit evidence of
his current income or expenses.  However, an IRS tax transcript showed that his income for 2009
was nearly $140,000 and for 2015 was over $182,000.
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debts are numerous and recent.  Though noting that
Applicant had hired a debt management company to assist him in resolving his financial problems,
the Judge found no evidence that he received actual financial counseling.  Applicant submitted no
evidence of responsible conduct for the five debts described above.  The Judge concluded that
Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from these debts.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge’s findings of fact contain errors and that his Response to the
SOR showed that he had addressed all of his debts.  He asserts that, had he known that inaccurate
information would be before the Judge, he would have requested a hearing.  
We have examined the Judge’s findings of fact in light of the record that was before him. 
The Judge resolved some of Applicant’s debts in his favor, for example allegations that he failed to
pay income tax for 2009 and 2012.  The Judge’s adverse findings are consistent with the record, in
2
particular Applicant’s Response to the SOR and his clearance interview summary.1  If Applicant
believed that the SOR or other documents in the File of Relevant Material (FORM) contained errors,
it was his responsibility to present corrective evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.7, which sets forth an
applicant’s responsibility for presenting objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation or explanation
to matters contained in the FORM.  As it stands, the Judge’s material findings of security concern
are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-04724 at 3 (App.  Bd. Aug. 18, 2017). 
Regarding Applicant’s claim that he would have chosen a hearing if he had understood the
nature of what would be presented to the Judge, we note that Applicant received the FORM on
December 8, 2016.  The FORM consisted of a Department Counsel memo and accompanying
evidence–the SOR and Applicant’s Response thereto; the security clearance application; Applicant’s
interrogatory answers, which include an authenticated copy of Applicant’s clearance interview; and
a credit report.  Both the FORM and the cover letter clearly stated that the contents of the FORM
would be presented to the Judge for his consideration and that Applicant could submit a response
setting forth objections or anything else he wanted to present.  There is no reason to believe that
Applicant was mis-advised about the evidence the Judge would consider, nor is there any reason to
believe that Applicant’s choice of an administrative determination was other than knowing and
intelligent.  Although pro se applicants are not held to the standards of lawyers, they are expected
to take reasonable steps to protect their rights.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 15-05047 at 4 (App. Bd.
Nov. 8, 2017).  Applicant’s brief includes a copy of the SOR Response. To the extent that Applicant
is arguing that the Judge did not consider it, he has failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec.
7, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
1Applicant’s SOR Response notes that his credit card accounts have been charged off.  That a creditor is no
longer actively seeking payment or that a debt is not otherwise collectable does not establish that the debt has been
resolved within the meaning of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03656 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 19, 2011). 
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
