 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
--------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07230 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Cathryn E. Young, Esq. 
Griffith, Young & Lass 
 
 
February 7, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns related to foreign influence raised by the presence 
of his family members, and potential financial interests, in Iraq. Applicant did not falsify a 
Government questionnaire as alleged. His request for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
 
2 
 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and E.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR, with attachments, on June 12, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Answer.) Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on December 8, 2016. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on January 17, 2017. The case was reassigned to me on January 
27, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on February 23, 2017, scheduling the hearing for April 10, 2017. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 
8, which were admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit I for Administrative 
Notice. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through 
G, which were also admitted without objection. The record was left open for receipt of 
additional documentation. Applicant presented two documents, which I marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits H and I, and were also admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 18, 2017. 
 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Republic of Iraq (Iraq). Department Counsel provided a five page 
summary of the facts, supported by four Government documents pertaining to Iraq, 
identified as HE I. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I 
take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They 
are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are 
set out in the Findings of Fact. (Tr. 15-16.) 
 
 The Government also moved to amend allegation 2.a in the SOR by correcting 
the date. There was no objection by Applicant. The amendment was granted. (Tr. 6.) 
The allegation was amended to read as follows: 
 
You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Standard Form 86, certified by you on 
December 31, 2014, in response to Section 20A, Foreign Financial 
Interest Real Estate: “Have you . . . ever owned, or do you anticipate 
owning . . . real estate in a foreign country?” You answered “No” and 
deliberately failed to disclose 1.b, above. 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.b. He denied SOR allegation 
¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and married. He is applying for a security clearance in 
connection with a prospective offer of employment from a Defense contractor. (Tr. 35.) 
 
Paragraph 1 – Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq in 1972. He received a college degree in Iraq in 1996. 
Beginning in 2003, after the invasion of Iraq, Applicant worked with the Coalition 
Provisional Authority in Iraq as a linguist/translator/interpreter/copywriter. He worked 
with various allied entities in Iraq until 2007. (Tr. 25, 27-30.) 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States under a Special Immigrant Visa in 
2007. He was granted this status as a person who had assisted coalition forces in Iraq. 
He was recommended for this visa by a U.S. Air Force brigadier general who had 
worked with Applicant in Iraq. That officer’s letter of recommendation is found on page 3 
of Applicant Exhibit D. (Tr. 25, 30.) 
 
 Applicant began working for a Defense contractor in 2007 and returned to Iraq for 
three years. (Tr. 32-33.) 
  
 Applicant became a naturalized American citizen on July 12, 2013. Applicant’s 
wife, who was born in Iraq but is of Lebanese ancestry and of Christian faith, is also a 
naturalized American citizen. (Applicant Exhibit A; Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 8 
and 17; Tr. 67-70.) 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother is 77 and in poor health. She lives in 
Baghdad, Iraq, with Applicant’s only sibling, a brother. Applicant’s mother has severe 
memory issues. His brother works for a hotel. Neither Applicant’s mother nor his brother 
are involved in the Iraqi government or military. Applicant has not seen his mother or 
brother since he first left Iraq in 2007. Applicant speaks with his brother and mother 
about once or twice a month. They do not know what Applicant does for a living. (Tr. 45-
49, 54-56, 70-78, 80.) 
 
 Applicant helped prepare a “Counterintelligence-focused Security Screening 
Questionnaire” dated January 29, 2015. Question 37 on the questionnaire states, “Do 
you or any member of your immediate family own property in a country other than the 
United States?” Applicant answered affirmatively and stated that his mother owns real 
property and an antique store in Baghdad, Iraq. Applicant stated at the hearing that he 
is unsure of the value of the property because of the volatility of the situation in Iraq. 
The value of $2.5 million in the questionnaire was based on information obtained from 
Applicant’s brother. Applicant had no way of knowing whether this was an accurate 
estimate. Applicant does not want anything to do with any of the properties and does 
 
4 
 
not believe he is going to inherit them from his mother. Applicant renounced his Iraqi 
citizenship when he became an American citizen and has no Iraqi identification of any 
type. (Answer; Government Exhibit 3 at question 37; Tr. 49-54, 58-59, 78-79.) 
 
Paragraph 2 – Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Appellant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows poor judgment, 
untrustworthiness or unreliability.  
 
 Appellant filled out an e-QIP on December 31, 2014. Section 20A of that 
questionnaire concerns Applicant’s Foreign Activities. A subsection asks whether 
Applicant had ever owned, or did he anticipate owning, real estate in a foreign country. 
Applicant answered this question, “No.” As stated, Applicant’s mother owns real 
property in Iraq. Applicant does not believe he is going to inherit this property. As stated, 
he fully described this property during a “Counterintelligence-focused Security 
Screening Questionnaire” prepared on January 29, 2015. This was less than a month 
after he filled out the e-QIP. (Tr. 58-59, 81-84.) 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant came to the United State with very little, and is proud to be a “self-
established” person. He saved the money he made working and was able to invest in 
real estate. (Applicant Exhibit C; Tr. 34, 36-39, 70-71.) 
 
 Regarding being an American citizen Applicant stated, “I like actually the 
principles and the values of this country because the first thing, the law. No one is 
above the law. This is the good thing actually in this country. The second thing, 
democracy. I mean everyone, if he’s born here actually if he’s native American, he can 
actually run for the presidency.” (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Applicant is a highly respected and successful linguist. This is shown by letters of 
appreciation and certificates of achievement presented to him with regard to his work in 
Iraq in the period from 2003 through 2007. (Applicant Exhibit D.) 
 
 Two military officers who worked with Applicant in Iraq wrote letters of 
recommendation in April 2017. A US Army colonel stated, “[Applicant] is very 
trustworthy and responsible. I have full confidence in his loyalty to the United States. His 
character is beyond reproach. . . . I would trust him with sensitive information and am 
honored to give him a strong reference.” (Applicant Exhibit H.) 
 
 A retired major in the US Army Reserve stated that Applicant is “a professional of 
great moral character, integrity and an outstanding work ethic.” (Applicant Exhibit I.) 
(See Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE I: Attachments.) 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
6 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 - Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
7 
 
  Applicant has a mother and a brother who live in Baghdad, Iraq. His mother owns 
real property and an antique store in Baghdad. Applicant’s brother estimates that the 
real property and the stores contents are worth about $2.5 million. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
Iraq has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly and 
contrary to U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant’s substantial and close family 
connections in that country have the potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a).2 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
                                                          
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
8 
 
Applicant has minimal contact with his mother and brother who live in Iraq. He 
has not seen them in ten years and has no desire to see them in the future. His contact 
with them is on a monthly basis. He is a proud American citizen, and he feels he has 
succeeded in this country on his own, without help from anyone. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) 
apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) also applies. Applicant has no desire to inherit any property in Iraq. He 
was extremely uncertain about his ability to have a legal right to it, since he has no Iraqi 
identity papers, and is no longer an Iraqi citizen. The value of $2.5 million put on the 
property by Applicant’s brother is extremely speculative, and is given little weight. 
 
Applicant is knowledgeable about his security responsibilities, and evinced a 
credible intent to follow appropriate rules in reporting any attempts by foreign actors to 
influence him. (Tr. 89-90.) 
 
Applicant has completely mitigated the security significance of the presence of 
his relations in Iraq, as well as the concerns over his family’s property there. Paragraph 
1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 - Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified a Government 
questionnaire filled out by him on December 31, 2014, by not admitting that he 
anticipated owning foreign property.  
 
I find that Applicant did not intend to falsify this questionnaire. I make this finding 
based on three factors. First, according to his testimony and other statements, Applicant 
does not have an expectation of inheriting this property from his mother. In other words, 
he does not anticipate owning foreign property, which is the gravamen of the question. 
So answering, “No,” was not a false answer. 
 
Second, English is the second language for the Applicant. The concept found in 
the word “anticipate” was difficult for the Applicant to understand and took some 
explanation at the hearing. (Tr. 80-84.) 
 
 
9 
 
Third and finally, Applicant was subject to a counterintelligence-focused security 
screening on January 29, 2015. This was less than a month after the e-QIP was 
prepared. The questionnaire prepared by the screener shows that Applicant fully 
disclosed the property his mother owned in Iraq, and gave a value. It is noted that the 
question is phrased differently, and concentrates on current ownership of property, not 
an anticipation of ownership. It was, therefore, easier for a person not fluent in the 
English language to understand.  
 
Based on my finding that Applicant did not falsify his questionnaire, none of the 
disqualifying or mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s conduct. Paragraph 2 is found 
for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(b), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant was born in Iraq, but from 2003 through 2010 he worked successfully 
for coalition forces in Iraq. Based on his work, and with the recommendation of an 
American general officer, Applicant received a Special Immigrant Visa. Applicant has 
shown himself to be a talented and patriotic American citizen and member of the 
Defense industry. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States due to his longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
10 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence and Personal Conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
