1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-07070 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 9, 2015. 
On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. The DOD 
CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 12, 2016, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations except for the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.e and ¶ 2.a, which he denied. 
Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 20, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for February 15, 2018. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified, and requested that I leave the record open 
for additional supplemental documentation. I left the record open until March 1, 2018, 
(Tr. 22, 47, 79, 80) and he submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, a character reference 
letter, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 26, 2018. At the hearing, department counsel moved to withdraw the 
Guideline C security concerns entirely. This included deleting the allegation in SOR ¶ 
2.a and including the allegation that was previously at SOR ¶ 2.b under Guideline B, 
and renumbering it as SOR ¶ 1.f. The newly added SOR ¶ 1.f alleges, “you owned an 
advertising business in Iraq from approximately November 2013 through January 2015. 
This motion was granted. (Tr. 11-12) It did not alter Applicant’s admission of this 
allegation.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iraq. The request and the attached source documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1).  
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
 
3 
 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE 1 source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The 
facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts from HE 1: 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The U.S. State Department warns 
that U.S. citizens traveling in Iraq remain at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist 
violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq and the 
Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of Iraq’s territory. Within areas under ISIL 
control, the Iraq government has little or no ability to exercise control and ensure public 
safety. Kidnappings and attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED’s) occur 
frequently in many areas of the country, including Baghdad. Such attacks often take 
place in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Anti-U.S. sectarian militias threaten U.S. citizens and western companies 
throughout Iraq. Iraq witnessed a continuing surge of terrorist activity in 2015, primarily 
as a result of the actions of ISIL. Although the government of Iraq has made significant 
progress in its campaign to retake occupied territory from ISIL, there remains a security 
vacuum in parts of Iraq. The U.S. State Department has also reported that ISIL 
committed the overwhelming number of significant human rights abuses, including 
attacks against civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL, and women 
and children. ISIL members committed acts of violence on a mass scale, including 
killings by suicide bombings, IED’s, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and 
other forms of execution. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of 
transparency at all levels, weakened the Iraq government’s authority and worsened 
effective human rights protections.2 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was born in the United Kingdom (UK) and remains 
a dual citizen of the UK and the United States (U.S.). (GE 2, Tr. 50) He left the UK with 
his family when he was 3 or 4 years old and moved to Erbil, Iraq. Applicant remains an 
Iraqi citizen by virtue of birth. (Tr. 52) He came to the U.S. with his family in 1988, and 
he was naturalized in 1993. (Tr. 57) He graduated from high school in the U.S. in 1994. 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1995. (Tr. 19) He testified that he served one year 
before taking advantage of an early out program designed to allow members to pursue 
                                                          
2 HE 1. It is noteworthy that ISIL has had little influence in the Kurdish sector of Iraq as ISIL incursions 
were recently repulsed by Kurdish and U.S. armed forces in 2015.  
 
3 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated February 9, 2015 (GE 1) and the counterintelligence investigation report 
dated April 6, 2015. (GE 2) 
 
 
4 
 
their education. (Tr. 19) He was accepted to enroll at a University in the UK tuition free. 
(Tr. 20) He claims to have received an administrative discharge but could not recall the 
characterization of his service.4 (Tr. 21) The record was left open until March 1, 2018 
specifically so that Applicant could provide a copy of his DD-214, and other 
supplemental documentation. (Tr. 22, 47, 79) He did not submit the DD-214, but 
submitted a character reference letter post hearing. (AE A)  
 
 Applicant attended four years of college courses at a University in UK from 1996-
2000, taking business administration courses, but he did not procure a degree. (Tr. 14) 
Applicant never married but he does have an 18-month-old son living in Bogota, 
Columbia, with his mother. (Tr. 17, 22, 23, 48) Applicant has been pending employment 
as a linguist since January 2015, contingent on obtaining a security clearance. Applicant 
has worked driving for a private company for over two years. (Tr. 61)   
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SCA) on 
February 9, 2015.5 In section 18 of his SCA, he disclosed his parents and one sister are 
residents of Iraq. He disclosed another sister born in Austria and living in the U.S., and 
a brother born in Erbil, Iraq, but now a U.S. citizen living in the U.S. (Tr. 30) Applicant 
claimed his parent’s address as the U.S. in his SCA, but testified that they have actually 
resided in Erbil, Iraq since returning in 2004.6 (Tr. 27) His parents live in one house in 
Erbil, and they have another vacation cabin in the Kurdish sector of Iraq, in addition to 
the home that they maintain in the U.S. (Tr. 36, 61) The two houses in Iraq are valued at 
$550,000 and the house in the U.S. is valued at $ 600,000. (Tr. 72)  
 
 Applicant’s parents are dual U.S.–Iraqi citizens and his sister is an Iraqi citizen. 
His father was chief of staff for Voice of America in the U.S., before moving back to Erbil 
in 2003. (Tr. 17) He moved back to Erbil to be a senior political advisor to the late 
President Talibani, with whom he was friends for 60 years. (Tr. 17-18, 68) His father 
remained in Iraq after the death of President Talibani. Applicant correctly noted that the 
Kurdish region of Iraq, or KRG, is an autonomous sector of Iraq, and has been a long-
term ally of the U.S. in its war on terrorism. (Tr. 13) Although Applicant claims that his 
father has no remaining affiliation with the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG), his 
father has a long history of political activity in Iraq dating back to the 1980’s when he 
was targeted by the Saddam Hussein regime due to his political status. (GE 2)  
 
 Applicant came back to the U.S. in 2000 for an opportunity at a major 
corporation. (Tr. 57) He worked there until returning to the Middle East in 2004, and 
ultimately Iraq. (Tr. 58) He served in Iraq from 2006 – 2008 as part of a U.S. DOD task 
force for business and stability operations. (Tr. 9) Essentially, this involved using U.S. 
tax dollars to facilitate business development in Iraq. Applicant last had in-person 
contact with his sister in Iraq by phone immediately before his hearing. (Tr. 31-33) They 
                                                          
4 Applicant listed service in the Navy as six months, from March 1995 to September 1995, in GE 1. 
 
5 GE 1. 
 
6Applicant also listed his own address as Erbil, Iraq (parent’s home) in his SCA, although he has resided    
at his parent’s house in the U.S. since early 2015. 
 
5 
 
confer weekly on a social networking application known as “What’s App.” (Tr. 32) 
Applicant lived with his parents in Erbil, Iraq, continuously from 2007 to 2015, with visits 
to the U.S. once or twice a year during that time. (Tr. 50) He has telephonic contact with 
his mother daily, and with his father annually. (Tr. 48, 74) His mother has no affiliation 
with KRG or the Iraqi Government or intelligence services. She travels back and forth 
between Iraq and the U.S. to avail herself of U.S. medicine. (Tr. 68) Applicant used his 
U.S. passport to travel because his UK passport expired years ago. (Tr. 50) Although he 
has Iraqi and dual U.S. – UK citizenship, he claims undivided loyalty to the U.S. (Tr. 50, 
61) Yet, he testified that he will likely return to Iraq if his linguist position does not 
materialize. (Tr. 77). His only assets in the U.S. are $4,000 in a U.S. bank account. (Tr. 
72)   
 
 Applicant admitted the five allegations in the SOR under Guideline B in his July 
2016 Answer, but clarified that he lived in Iraq since 2007 vice 2004. He also admitted 
the amended allegation at SOR ¶ 1.f, that he owned an advertising agency in Iraq from 
November 2013 to January 2015.  He testified that he adopted an advertising strategy 
he observed in the U.S. by placing paid advertisements on taxicabs and other 
transportation modes in Iraq. (Tr. 51) He maintained a bank account in Iraq in 
connection with that business. (Tr. 38) However, he had to close the agency, and the 
bank account, when the terrorist group Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) battled with 
Kurdish forces in Iraq in 2015. (Tr. 59) 
 
 Applicant testified that he is fluent in Kurdish, and speaks some Arabic and 
Portuguese. (Tr. 40) His English is flawless. He has been waiting approximately three 
years for the security clearance process with the hope that he can serve the U.S. as a 
linguist, likely in Syria or the Kurdish region. (Tr. 39)  He previously served the U.S. 
DOD on a task force for business stability operations from roughly 2006 to 2008. (Tr. 
41-43) The mission of that task force was to develop business capacity in Iraq by 
facilitating investment by corporations and creating jobs. In that role, Applicant claims 
he had an interim security clearance. (Tr. 9, 41) Applicant provided a character 
reference letter from his supervisor on that task force, attesting to his allegiance to the 
U.S. (AE A) He maintains friendships and associations from years working in Iraq, 
mostly via Facebook. (Tr. 71) He stands to inherit the two houses in Iraq with his 
siblings. (Tr. 72) 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
Applicant’s parents are dual citizens, and his sister is a citizen and resident of 
Iraq. He also has many friends and business associates from his many years working in 
Iraq. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both 
directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are implicated by the 
evidence. Although the Kurdish population of Iraq has historically been an ally of the 
United States, the recent political instability in that country and region has become a 
potential threat to U.S. interests operating there. Accordingly, Applicant’s relationship 
with his parents and sister, who are citizens and residents of Iraq, creates a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
and  
 
 
8 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working and living in 
Iraq and stated his intention to return to Iraq if his economic opportunity to serve as a 
linguist does not materialize. Indeed, he would work overseas as a linguist if it does 
materialize. Although he went to high school in the U.S., he left for college in the U.K. 
after one year or less in the Navy, and he has not demonstrated a long-term 
commitment to the U.S. He is an economic opportunist. He also has a problem with 
veracity. His SCA states that he served six months in the Navy. He testified that he 
served about a year. He was evasive about the circumstances and characterization of 
his discharge and did not produce his DD-214. He is presumed to have strong bonds of 
affection with his parents and sister in Iraq. Despite investment of billions of dollars of 
U.S. tax dollars into that country, it remains corrupt and unstable, and it presents a 
heightened risk that Applicant’s relatives may be manipulated, coerced or exploited to 
leverage Applicant for classified or sensitive information.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.7  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant has minimal ties to the U.S. including a transient job as a driver and a 
small bank account. He has never served as a U.S. linguist, translator, or cultural 
advisor previously during the conflict in Iraq. He served briefly in the U.S. Navy but 
produced no evidence that his service was honorable. Such evidence would weigh 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
9 
 
heavily towards approval of his security clearance. See ISCR case No. 07-00034 at 2 
(APP. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) 
 
 Applicant lives in his parent’s house. His parents are dual citizens, and his sister 
is a citizen and resident of Iraq, which is an unstable regime. His contact with them is 
frequent. Although, the KRG sector of Iraq is an anomaly and generally much safer than 
the rest of Iraq, it is nonetheless susceptible to probing and attempted incursions by 
ISIL. There is no indication that they are affiliated with the Iraqi government or 
intelligence services. However, his father has long-standing political connections in Iraq 
going back to the 1980’s. Applicant stands to inherit the properties in Iraq along with his 
siblings. There are few countries more vulnerable to terrorists than Iraq. Applicant’s lack 
of candor leaves me with doubts about his testimony and evidence. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant would report contacts with his relatives by foreign 
intelligence agents, or that he has any long-term commitment to the U.S. None of the 
mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 8 are applicable to the contacts with family members, 
which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.d.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline. Applicant is 42 years old. He is a father and he served 
in Iraq from 2004-2009 on behalf of U.S. DOD in business and stability operations task 
force. He submitted a post hearing character reference from his former boss for a brief 
time on that task force, attesting to Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. However, virtually 
all of his adult work life was spent in Iraq.    
 
 
10 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                      Paragraph 1, Guideline B:                         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:                             Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     Withdrawn 
 
   
                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
          ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
