 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06727 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed, in part, 
to his financial problems. Notwithstanding, his evidence is insufficient to show that he 
has been financially responsible. He paid some of his delinquent consumer accounts, 
but failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 
2013. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 15, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 15, 2016, 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on June 14, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to another administrative judge on December 6, 2016, 
and to me on March 27, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 1, 2017, 
setting the hearing for March 29, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
 
submitted exhibit AE 1. AE 2 was submitted post-hearing and is comprised of three 
favorable reference statements. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.e, and 1.g 
through 1.i. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f. His admissions to the SOR 
and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the record evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1982, and enlisted in the U.S. Army. He honorably served until his 
discharge in June 1992. He then joined the Army Reserve where he served for one year 
and received an honorable discharge. Applicant held a clearance while in the service 
between 1987 and 1992. The clearance lapsed with his discharge. He was granted a 
secret clearance in 1998 that was upgraded to a top-secret clearance in 2007, and has 
been renewed to present.  
 
Applicant married his first wife in 1984 and divorced in 1994. He married his 
second wife in 1995 and separated in 2005, but never divorced. She died in 2015. He 
has two adult children, ages 32 and 30. Applicant attended some college, but did not 
earn sufficient credits for a degree. Applicant travelled on vacation to Mexico for about 
six days in December 2008, and the Bahamas for a period of six days in December 
2010. 
 
Applicant worked for a private company between December 1999 and 
September 2004. In September 2004, Applicant’s current employer, a federal 
contractor, hired him. His current yearly salary is $73,000. He has been living with a 
cohabitant since April 2014. He testified that they share the household expenses and 
with her assistance, he believes he should be able to pay his delinquent debts quickly. 
 
In his October 2014 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had financial problems, 
which included some delinquent accounts and a judgment. He also disclosed that he 
failed to file his federal and state income tax returns between 2010 and 2013. He does 
not know whether he owes back taxes for those years. Applicant believed that many of 
the delinquent debts date back to his married days. When his late wife left him, she did 
not help him to pay their accumulated debts and Applicant assumed those debts. 
Applicant claimed that he was in the process of contacting a company (C) seeking their 
assistance to consolidate his debts and set up a payment plan. 
 
Applicant explained in his October 2014 SCA, that he has not able to pay his 
debts sooner because he was sick with Rheumatoid Arthritis. The sickness flares up 
periodically and the pain and fatigue prevented him from working. At times, he has 
become overwhelmed and depressed requiring medical attention. Applicant noted that 
 
3 
 
 
he received disability payments and was unable to work between May 2011 and May 
2013, and between 2002 and 2004. In 2011, he was earning about $68,000 a year, and 
when he returned to work his income was reduced to $55,000 a year. His disability 
contributed to his reduced earnings for several years. He was unable to pay his 
delinquent debts and living expenses. He lived with his grandmother between 2003 and 
2016, providing her with some financial assistance. 
 
In his 2014 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had failed to file his federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013. He explained that his 
sickness caused him pain, fatigue, and depression, all of which overwhelmed him and 
prevented him from being financially responsible. Applicant claimed he was getting his 
records together and had retained the services of tax professionals to help him prepare 
and file his late income tax returns. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed his 
sister was helping him to complete and file his delinquent income tax returns. He 
promised he would file them not later than July 2016.  
 
Applicant also claimed he did not know how to properly file his income tax returns 
because of his separation. He did not have all the documents he needed, his late wife 
was not communicating with him, and he did not want to make mistakes in his income 
tax returns. 
 
In early 2015, Applicant retained the services of a company (F) to help him 
consolidate some of his delinquent debts and to set up a debt payment plan. His 
documentary evidence shows current participation and consecutive payments made 
from 2015 to March 2017. 
 
Concerning the SOR allegations, I find that: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,281) alleged an unpaid judgment against Applicant from 2011. 
Applicant explained that he has not been able to contact the creditor. He could not 
explain why the debt was not included in his consolidation plan. (Tr. 45)  
 
Applicant’s evidence shows he paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($254), 1.f 
($195), and 1.g ($261). (Tr. 33) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($10,712) and 1.e ($890) are being paid through Applicant’s debt 
consolidation and repayment plan. Between March 2016 and March 2017, Applicant 
reduced his debt on the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c by close to $3,000. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($440) and 1.h ($705) are unpaid and are not part of Applicant’s debt 
consolidation plan. Applicant averred that his medical insurance should have paid for 
the medical account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and that he made some payments on the 
account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He failed to present any documentary evidence to 
corroborate his claims. 
 
 
4 
 
 
As of his hearing in March 2017, Applicant had not filed any of his delinquent 
income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.i). (Tr. 35) Moreover, 
Applicant testified he had not filed federal or state income tax returns for tax years 2014, 
2015, and 2016. (Tr. 50) 
 
Applicant states he has learned his lesson. He acknowledged that he should 
have been more responsible filing and paying his taxes. He believes he was doing the 
best he could based on his circumstances. Applicant noted his sickness impaired his 
ability to prioritize and think straight. He highlighted his 10 years of service during most 
of which he held a clearance without any issues or concerns. Applicant promised to 
continue paying his legal debts and to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Applicant repeatedly stated that he is not a threat to the United States. He 
considers himself to be an honest, patriotic, and dedicated American. He would like to 
continue serving the United States through his work for federal contractors. Applicant 
has established an excellent reputation for his professionalism, work ethic, knowledge, 
and quality of his work. He is well liked by his supervisors, clients, and coworkers. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
 
5 
 
 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He had 
several delinquent accounts that have been in collection or charged off since 2011. 
Moreover, he failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2013. AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . income tax as 
 
6 
 
 
required.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and recent. Some of his financial problems could be attributed to, 
or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his control, such as: his 2005 separation, 
his sickness and periods of disability with the resulting loss of income, and his financial 
support to his grandmother. Notwithstanding, considering the evidence as a whole, I 
find that Applicant failed to establish he was financially responsible under the 
circumstances, and that his financial problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged he should have been more responsible in addressing 
his delinquent accounts and his tax obligations. On balance, the record shows he 
responsibly addressed most of his delinquent consumer accounts based on his financial 
ability. Nevertheless, Applicant failed to establish his financial responsibility concerning 
the filing of his income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2016. Applicant has 
known of the government’s financial concerns about his failure to file his income tax 
returns since at least 2014 when he submitted his SCA. He was again made aware of 
the raised security concerns two years later when he received the 2016 SOR. 
Notwithstanding, as of his hearing day, Applicant had not filed any of his delinquent 
income tax returns.  
 
 Applicant’s promises to resolve his longstanding tax situation do not mitigate the 
financial considerations concerns. His failure to file his income tax returns shows a lack 
of judgment and an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and 
sensitive information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
 
8 
 
 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 53, received an honorable discharge from the U.S. Army after 10 years 
of service. While in the service, Applicant possessed a clearance. His financial 
problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his 
control. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence of financial 
responsibility to mitigate the concerns raised by his failure to file federal and state 
income tax returns between 2010 through 2013. Considering the evidence as a whole, I 
find that his financial problems occurred under circumstances likely to recur. His 
financial problems are unresolved and not under control. The financial considerations 
security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant  
 
 Subparagraph 1.i:      Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
