 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03164 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Although Applicant’s financial issues arose from conditions largely 
beyond his control, the majority of his debt remains unresolved and his financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 21, 2013. 
On April 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 24, 2016, and the case was 
assigned to another administrative judge who scheduled the hearing for November 14, 
2016. The hearing was continued, and the case was assigned to me on January 24, 2017. 
On May 4, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant 
that the hearing was scheduled for May 24, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 12 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, and at the close of the hearing I left the record open until June 7, 2017, 
to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2017. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 35 debts totaling $38,082; $22,600 of which is owed for 11 
delinquent student loan debts. It also alleges that: Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
January 2001; filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in July 2010; filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
October 2011; and, made $9,000 worth of unauthorized personal charges on his 
corporate credit card. In his Answer, Applicant admits 19 of the debts, including all of the 
student loans, and denies the remaining 16. He admits the bankruptcies, but denies the 
unauthorized use of his corporate credit card. He also discusses the status of each of the 
alleged debts. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. The debts 
are corroborated by Applicant’s October 2015, March 2015, April 2013, January 2011, 
and October 2010 credit bureau reports (CBR) (GX 8; GX 7; GX 6; GX 5; GX 4) and 
discussed in Applicant’s April 2013 and February 2011 personal subject interviews (PSI). 
(GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old systems administrator currently employed by a federal 
contractor since January 2011. He has been employed as a federal contractor since July 
2009. Applicant served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Army from May 1995 until 
February 2002. He attended college from approximately 2003 until 2005, and holds 
several information technology certificates. Applicant and his wife married in 1997, and 
they have two children, ages 20 and 13. Applicant has held his current security clearance 
since January 2009, and was previously granted a clearance in May 1995 while on active 
duty. (GX 1.)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to several things. He was unemployed 
from February 2003 until October 2003; from August 2004 until March 2005 while in 
college; and, from December 2009 to February 2010. He paid for his mother-in-law’s 
 
3 
 
 
funeral expenses, and helped financially support his mother. He also believes that at least 
one of the SOR debts (SOR ¶ 1.e), and possibly other debts, is attributable to a family 
member who misused Applicant’s personal information to take out a payday loan. 
 In about 2005, Applicant placed his student loans in deferment. Applicant testified 
that he believed at the time his student loans were deferred, that the period of deferment 
was indefinite. He does not recall receiving notices that indicated that the loans were no 
longer in deferment, or that payment was required. After leaving college, Applicant moved 
several times, however he has been in his current home since October 2006. (Tr. 48-50.) 
Applicant believes his student loans became delinquent at some point in 2009. (GX 2.)  
 
Regarding his 11 student loans, in his Answer, Applicant stated that he contacted 
the Department of Education in September 2015 to start making payments. He was told 
he needed to contact the collection agency, which he did. The collection agency informed 
Applicant that the loans had been sold to another agency, the name of which they could 
not disclose. Applicant stated, “I am and have been researching this account to find out 
what I need to do to make payments.” He testified that his last contact with any entity 
regarding repayment of the student loans was in October 2016. Since that time, he has 
been waiting to be contacted by a collection agency. He has never directly made a 
payment on any of the loans to any loan-servicing entity. (Tr. 47-52.) The delinquent 
student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.r through 1.bb are not resolved. 
 
Between May and June 2016, Applicant paid the following medical debts alleged 
in the SOR: ¶ 1.b - $150; ¶ 1.j - $150; SOR ¶ 1.k - $300; and ¶ 1.m - $150. (AX B; Tr. 23-
25.) Applicant credibly testified that he has resolved the $767 past-due mortgage-loan 
account (SOR ¶ 1.q), and that his mortgage loan is now current. These debts are 
resolved. 
 
Applicant testified that he paid the $147 internet-provider debt (SOR ¶ 1.a), the 
$75 internet-provider debt (SOR ¶ 1.hh), and the $377 internet-provider debt (SOR ¶ 1.o). 
He stated that since July 2016, he has been making $200 monthly payments on the 
$5,685 (SOR ¶ 1.p) balance owed for a vehicle that was totaled. (Tr. 23-24; Tr. 41-43.) 
(Tr. 44-46.) Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence in support of these 
assertions. 
 
Applicant stated that he disputed the $116 cellular-telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.c), the 
$1,244 credit-card debt (SOR ¶ 1.dd), the $339 cellular-telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.ee), and 
the $912 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.ii). He stated that he disputed and filed a police 
report regarding the fraudulently obtained $406 payday loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence in support of these assertions. 
 
Applicant denies owing the $30 medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.l, 
and 1.n, and the $36 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, stating that these appear to be 
 
4 
 
 
medical co-pays that he always pays at the time of treatment. (Tr. 39-40.) He does not 
recognize the $4,075 charged-off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.gg. These debts are 
unresolved. 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001 at the advice of an attorney. He 
believes this was a mistake, and that debt consolidation would have resolved his financial 
issues at that time. He does not recall the amount discharged in the bankruptcy. Applicant 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2010 to consolidate his debt, which was due, in part, to 
helping his mother pay her bills. The bankruptcy was dismissed for failure to make 
payments. Applicant testified that on the erroneous advice of his attorney, he was making 
payments of approximately $900 a month, and that the actual required monthly payment 
was approximately $1,200 per month. Applicant re-filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2011, 
and made $785 automatic payments every two weeks until the bankruptcy was voluntarily 
dismissed in 2014. (Tr. 57-59.) Applicant stated in his 2013 PSI that he was uncertain 
which accounts were delinquent prior to filing for bankruptcy, that he did not know the 
amount of the delinquencies, and did not know if any of the debts were reaffirmed. His 
mortgage loan and student loans were included in the 2011 bankruptcy. (GX 2.) 
 
Applicant and his wife have separated on several occasions, including in May 
2017. Applicant’s wife does not have an income, and during periods of separation, 
Applicant is responsible for his wife’s living expenses. (Tr. 65-67.) In response to the 
allegation that Applicant violated company policy by using his corporate credit card for 
personal use (SOR ¶ 1.mm), Applicant stated that his wife took the card from his wallet 
and incurred unauthorized personal charges of $9,000, without his permission or 
knowledge. This event led to one of their separations. The debt was included in the 2011 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy and is resolved. Applicant stated that he and his wife will divorce 
following the outcome of his security clearance adjudication. (AX A.) 
 
In his May 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that it was his plan to “work overseas for 
one year in order to get [his] past and current bills paid in full.” He further stated that he 
had planned many times to “set things right but something would always come up.” He 
concluded his Answer by stating that he had a “plan in place to remediate these [financial] 
issues” and that he was prepared to finally “take control of [his] finances.”   
 
At his May 2017 hearing, Applicant reiterated his intention to resolve his delinquent 
debts. He stated that he will be seeking overseas employment to alleviate his financial 
stresses. He also stated that he would be taking a 401(k) loan in July 2017 to resolve his 
student loans and other debts. (Tr. 22; AX A.) Applicant is currently making $200 monthly 
payments through an installment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on 
a $2,400 tax debt for tax year 2016. He is current on his ongoing financial obligations, 
has not incurred any other recent delinquent debt, and contributes to his 401(k). (Tr. 60-
65.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s coworker since September 2015, considers Applicant to be 
conscientious and trustworthy, and recommends him for a security clearance. Another of 
Applicant’s coworkers, who has worked with Applicant since November 2015, considers 
Applicant to be a professional of impeccable character, who should be trusted with 
classified information. (AX C.) Applicant received a positive performance evaluation for 
the period of July 2015 through June 2016. (AX D.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
 
6 
 
 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”).  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. While the conditions that 
contributed to Applicant’s financial problems, including several periods of unemployment, 
unanticipated funeral expenses for his mother-in-law, financial support for his mother 
during her illness, and periods of separation from his wife, were largely beyond his control, 
he did not act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s filing Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2011, completing the mandatory financial counseling, and making 
payments until 2014 were reasonable efforts to consolidate and resolve his outstanding 
debt and to better manage his finances. Applicant’s wife made the $9,000 unauthorized 
charges on Applicant’s company credit card without his permission, and the debt was 
resolved through the Chapter 13 bankruptcy. However, his voluntary dismissal of the 
bankruptcy was not responsible under the circumstances. Applicant’s 11 student loan 
debts, totaling over $22,000, were included in the bankruptcy, and were arguably 
scheduled for repayment through the bankruptcy process. He has never made a direct 
payment on his student loans, either before or after the bankruptcies, and he has not 
contacted any loan-servicing company since October 2016. Instead, he is awaiting 
contact from a collection agency. The four SOR debts, totaling $750, for which Applicant 
provided proof of payment, were paid after Applicant received the SOR in April 2016. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence to support his assertions that he 
paid, is paying, or has disputed any of the other SOR debts. Applicant has been planning 
to seek employment abroad to resolve his financial delinquencies since at least May 
2016. He also planned to borrow money from his 401(k) in July 2017 to resolve his debts. 
However, there is no record evidence indicating that he has taken any actions in 
furtherance of these plans. Although Applicant has paid several of the smaller SOR debts, 
he has not made a good-faith effort, or established a viable plan, to resolve the majority 
of his debts. None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the military for almost six years, and continues to 
serve in the defense industry. He is trusted and well-regarded by his employer and trusted 
by his coworkers. He has continuously held a security clearance for more than eight 
years.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his finances. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.l:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n through 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.r through 1.ll:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.mm:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
