 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05175 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney. Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
February 22, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B and C.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 17, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 25, 2017, scheduling the hearing for March 8, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection, and Hearing Exhibit (HX) I for Administrative Notice. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant presented 18 documents, eleven of 
which are attached to his Answer, and the remaining five of which were offered at his 
hearing. I marked Applicant’s prehearing and hearing Exhibits (AppXs) as A through R, 
all of which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on March 21, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government Counsel and Applicant’s Counsel, both 
requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to the Arab Republic of 
Egypt (Egypt). Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, and 
Applicant’s Counsel a seven-page summary, both supported by three Government 
documents and ten Applicant documents pertaining to Egypt, identified as HE I and 
AppX R, respectively. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. 
I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports 
provided by both the Government and Applicant. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., and 2.c. He denied SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a., 2.a. and 2.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (TR at page 15 line 
23 to page 18 line 16, and GX 1 at page 5.) He has been employed with the defense 
contractor since 2009. (TR at page 15 line 23 to page 18 line 16, and GX 1 at pages 
12~13.) He has held a security clearance since 2009. (Id.) He is married to a U.S. 
citizen, and has two adult children, one of whom served in the U.S. Army for five years. 
(TR at page 15 line 23 to page 18 line 16.) 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference   
 
 1.a. Applicant, who came to the United States in about 1987~1988, admits that 
after becoming a U.S. citizen in 1992, he obtained an Egyptian National Identity Card 
(ID). Applicant received a Bachelor’s Degree in Egypt, but “he had to get an ID in order 
to obtain . . . [a copy of his] Degree.” (TR at page 18 line 24 to page 21 line 7, at page 
34 line 7 to page 35 line 7, and GX 1 at pages 2~3.) However, he denies that he still 
possesses this ID. (Answer at page 1.) In September of 2014, Applicant surrendered his 
National Identity Card to his Assistant Facility Security Officer (AFSO); who “destroyed” 
said ID, as certified by his AFSO. (Id., Answer at page 1, and AppX N.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that he voted in an Egyptian National Election in May of 
2014. His cousin picked up Applicant and drove him to the Egyptian Embassy. (TR at 
page 21 line 10 to page 24 line 14, and at page 35 line 8 to page 36 line 13.) He had no 
intention of voting; but got caught up in the celebratory atmosphere. Applicant 
 
3 
 
discovered that he could vote by using his ID, and did so. This is the only time Applicant 
ever voted in a non-U.S. election, and has no intention of so voting in the future. (Id.) As 
stated above, in September of 2014, Applicant surrendered the ID to his AFSO; who 
“destroyed” said ID, as certified by his AFSO. (Id., Answer at page 1, and AppX N.) 
  
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 2.a. Applicant denies that his spouse is a dual national with Iraq. Although born in 
Iraq, she has been a U.S. citizen since 1988, for about thirty years, and resides with 
Applicant in the United States. (TR at page 25 line 5 to page 27 line 14, and AppX M.) 
“All her family” reside in the United States. (Id.) 
 
 2.b. Applicant’s mother died in January of 2015; and as such, is no longer a 
citizen and resident of Egypt. (TR at page 27 line 15 to page 29 line 2.) 
 
 2.c. Applicant’s two elderly sisters are citizens and residents of Egypt. (TR at 
page 29 line 6 to page 32 line 6, and at page 36 lines 14~18.) They are both widowed, 
in their 70s, live together, and have no connection with the Egyptian government. (Id.) 
They know nothing about Applicant’s employment, but he does contact them about 
twice a month for casual conversation. (TR at page 29 line 6 to page 32 line 6, and at 
page 36 lines 14~18.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Egypt. Since 2015 
and continuing, the Egyptian government continues to confront active terrorist groups. 
Political protests occur without warning throughout Egypt. Demonstrations have led to 
frequent violent clashes between police and protestors, resulting in deaths, injuries, and 
property damage. The most significant human rights problems in Egypt involve 
excessive use of force by security forces.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military 
organization; and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with 
U.S. national security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
  Applicant obtained an Egyptian ID, and used it to vote in an Egyptian election in 
2014. Arguably, the evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions of 
AG ¶¶ 10(b) and 10(d). 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
 Applicant has surrendered his ID to his AFSO, who destroyed it. He has 
absolutely no intention of obtaining another Egyptian ID or of voting in any future  
Egyptian election. His veracity in this regard is evidence by the plethora of letters of 
support and his achievements as an interpreter for the United States. (AppXs B`K and 
Q.) AG ¶ 11(e) provides mitigation with respect to this guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant has two elderly sisters who are citizens and residents of Egypt. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s contact with his retired, widowed, elderly sisters is casual, at best. 
They know nothing of his continuing service to his adopted country, the United States. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant has the unqualified support of those who 
know him in his service to the United States. (AppXs E~K and Q.) Furthermore, he can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to his 
longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for national security eligibility and a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence 
and Foreign Preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
