 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06751 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Troy L. Nussbaum, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 2, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 29, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for September 20, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.b by deleting the words “or 
delete” from the allegation. The motion was granted without objection. 
 
Applicant’s objection to Department Counsel’s motion to amend SOR ¶ 2.d was 
overruled. The allegation now reads: 
 
You gave false answers in response to interrogatories provided to you by 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals on or around August 5, 2016. 
In providing additional information regarding your July 10, 2015 subject 
interview, you stated that the computers at issue were running a version of 
“Unreal Tournament,” an online first-person shooter game. In fact, you 
knew that the computers were being used as a warez server in addition to 
being used to run Unreal Tournament. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
GE 3 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified, called three 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J and AA through JJ. AE 
A through J and BB through JJ were admitted without objection. AE AA is a 
memorandum from Applicant’s attorney commenting on the reliability of GE 3. The 
objection to AE AA as substantive evidence was sustained. However, it will be 
considered as argument. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old network engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since 2012. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married for the third time. He has four 
children and two stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant worked as a field technician for an Internet services provider from the 
late 1990s to the early 2000s. His responsibilities included maintaining the hardware. 
Applicant stated that he had no software responsibilities. At some point in the late 
1990s, he told one of the owners that in the past he downloaded software using warez,2 
an online site that permitted pirated software to be downloaded and shared. The owner 
told him that it was a bad idea, and that he was not to do it at the company.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28, 31. 
 
2 Warez is a common computing and broader cultural term referring to pirated software (i.e. illegally 
copied, often after deactivation of anti-piracy measures) that is distributed via the Internet. See 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warez. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-39, 104-134; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
 The company decided to offer the online game Unreal Tournament to their 
customers as an added feature. A server was sent to Applicant’s home to be used for 
the online game, which he transported to the company. At some point, before or after 
the server was shipped to Applicant, warez software was installed on the server that 
permitted pirated software to be downloaded and shared. Applicant used the warez on 
the server to download software, including educational material, music, games, 
pornographic4 videos, and movies. Applicant estimated that he had several dozen CDs 
and DVDs of pirated software at his home.5 
 
 The FBI was conducting an investigation into pirated software and went to 
Applicant’s home in December 2001. Applicant’s wife called him and told him they were 
there. He told her to hide the pirated software. Applicant was interviewed by the FBI on 
several occasions. He did not provide a signed statement, but the interviews were 
summarized by the FBI agents. The report of the interviews indicated that Applicant 
initially emphasized that the only purpose of the server was to be a gaming server, but 
he subsequently stated that the true purpose of the server was for servicing pirated 
software or warez. Applicant stated that his participation began when a co-worker (AB) 
requested that Applicant allow for the placement of the warez server on the company’s 
network. In exchange for his cooperation, Applicant was given “leech” privileges to 
access all the files on the network. The report also noted that Applicant stated that in 
response to a higher-than-anticipated traffic volume that threatened to crash the current 
server, another warez server with extremely high storage capacity was shipped to him. 
This server was collocated with the original gaming server.6 
 
 Applicant gave the FBI his pirated software, and he provided the FBI agents with 
consent to search his home. Computers, pirated software contained on CDs and DVDs, 
and other items were seized. The FBI also seized legitimate non-pirated CDs and 
DVDs, including unopened Christmas presents.7 
 
 Applicant retained an attorney and about a month later was interviewed by the 
FBI at the U.S. Attorney’s Office pursuant to a proffer agreement. The FBI report of this 
interview is somewhat different than the report of the initial interview, but for the most 
part, consistent with Applicant’s hearing testimony. He stated that he was unaware that 
the server was being used as a warez server until he learned it from AB a couple of 
weeks after receiving the server. Applicant cooperated with the FBI, acted as a 
confidential informant for two to three years, and wore a wire. No charges were ever 
filed against him, nor were any charges ever filed against AB. The FBI retained the CDs 
and DVDs, legitimate and pirated, but returned other seized items to Applicant.8  
                                                          
4 I am using the common definition of pornography, as opposed to its legal definition. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-43, 78-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 41, 48, 76-77; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. at 43-47, 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D, E. 
 
8 Tr. at 49-54, 139-153; AE D, E. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in July 2015. A signed 
statement was not obtained, but the interview was summarized in a report of 
investigation (ROI). Applicant responded affirmatively to a question whether he had ever 
been investigated by a law enforcement agency for pirating software or media, or for 
aiding anyone else to do so. He described being investigated by the FBI, as follows: 
 
Without Subject’s knowledge, a warez server was installed on a server 
that was under Subject’s area of responsibility. The warez sever program 
is illegal software used to distribute copyrighted or pirated software and 
files, such as movies and music. As the systems administrator, Subject 
would regularly receive Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) 
notifications that users were illegally downloading software, movies, and 
music. As a result of these notifications, Subject was responsible for 
shutting down internet access to those customers that DMCA notices were 
directed against. During the FBI Operation Buccaneer, the FBI 
investigated, arrested, and charged individuals involved in warez servers. 
One day in the mid to late 1990’s, exact date unrecalled, special agents 
from the FBI arrived at Subject’s job location in [location] and confiscated 
the server with the warez program on it and Subject’s computer. On 
Subject’s work computer was the account and billing information for the 
customers of [Applicant’s employer]. Subject was then questioned 
concerning his knowledge of the warez server and the customer account 
information on his work computer. Subject was an authorized user for the 
customer account information. Subject denied that he had any knowledge 
of the warez server installed on the servers in [location]. As a result of the 
FBI’s investigation, Subject was never arrested, charged, or convicted of 
any offense. Subject has not received any additional notifications 
concerning his involvement or knowledge of the warez server. 
 
 DOHA issued interrogatories to Applicant on August 5, 2016. He responded on 
an indeterminate date. Subject to the following corrections and additional information, 
he certified the ROI as accurately reflecting his interview: 
 
After personal reflection the year was either late 2000 or early 2001, the 
exact day and month cannot be recalled.  
 
The FBl’s Operation Buccaneer was a national investigation by the FBl’s 
cybercrimes division for Illegal Software and conducted nationally at 
different locations. The server in question was being monitored and 
tracked by the FBI, it was shipped to my home address from another 
authorized [Applicant’s employer] Employee whom had permission from 
the company to place it in service in the [location] facility. All company 
hardware at that time, under employment with [Applicant’s employer] was 
shipped to my home address for placement in remote locations. The 
server was running a game server called “Unreal Tournament” by GT 
Interactive, Atari Inc. This is how it fell under my realm of duties, as an 
administrator. It was authorized to be installed by [Applicant’s employer] 
 
5 
 
as an added-value-service to current customers who liked to play on-line 
games. During this investigation the FBI seized not only company property 
but also personal property. In which all of my own personal property was 
returned by the FBI after examination. As a result of the FBl’s investigation 
I was never charged with any crime. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally providing false or misleading information during the 
background interview and in response to DOHA interrogatories. He testified that the part 
of the interview about the incident only lasted about 20 to 30 minutes. He stated that he 
told the investigator that when he racked the server up, he was unaware that warez was 
installed on it. He stated that he eventually became aware that the server was being 
used as a warez server, but “installed” is a term of art, meaning placing the software on 
the server. Therefore, his statement to the investigator was correct, that he had no 
knowledge of how the warez software was “installed” on the server. He stated that he 
did not correct the ROI in the interrogatories, because the ROI was accurate. He also 
stated that he was advised not to volunteer information. He stated that in retrospect, he 
should have also volunteered that he downloaded pirated software. He stated that he 
has not downloaded or otherwise used any pirated matter since the FBI investigation, 
and he has been completely honest with his employers about his involvement in the 
incident.9 
 
 Applicant called witnesses and submitted documents and letters attesting to his 
excellent job performance. He is praised for his trustworthiness, work ethic, reliability, 
loyalty, patriotism, leadership, dedication, maturity, judgment, candor, expertise, 
professionalism, honesty, responsibility, commitment, and integrity. He is recommended 
for a security clearance.10 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 54-74, 87-92, 98, 156-164; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F. 
 
10 Tr. at 101-137, 155-164; AE B, C, H-J. 
 
6 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant used the warez on his company’s server to download pirated software, 
including educational material, music, games, pornographic videos, and movies. When 
the FBI went to his home, he told his wife to hide his pirated software. Those actions 
reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. They also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
Much of the information provided by Applicant during his background interview 
and in his response to interrogatories was true. It was the omitted information that was 
misleading. Nowhere in the interview or his clarifying comments in the interrogatories 
does he admit any culpability in the incident. I did not find Applicant’s explanation for the 
background interview and his response to DOHA interrogatories to be credible. While 
there is some question when Applicant became aware the server was being used as a 
warez server, he clearly knew it before the FBI investigation and used the server to 
download pirated material. I find that his omission of that information was intentional 
and done to mislead the government about his participation in the matter. His false 
statement in response to interrogatories that “all of [his] own personal property was 
returned by the FBI after examination” is consistent with that intent, because it does not 
reveal that the FBI retained his pirated software. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
8 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s conduct at his former company and with the FBI occurred more than 
16 years ago. He cooperated with the FBI, acted as a confidential informant for two to 
three years, and wore a wire. There is no evidence that he has downloaded or 
otherwise used any pirated matter since the FBI investigation. That conduct, as alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, is mitigated. 
 
 Having determined that Applicant intentionally omitted information in an attempt 
to mislead the government, I have also determined that his explanations that the 
omissions were unintentional were also false. It would be inconsistent to find that 
conduct mitigated.11   
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. His actions with the warez server and telling his wife to hide the 
pirated software occurred more than 16 years ago. He cooperated with the FBI, acted 
as a confidential informant for two to three years, and wore a wire. Those actions 
mitigate that conduct. However, his intentionally misleading information about his 
conduct is not mitigated.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
     
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge’s rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
