                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 16-03514 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ngozi Anidi, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and
financial considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified
information is granted.
On November 10, 2014, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing or security clearance application (SCA).
(Government Exhibit (GE 1) On December 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD)
sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations, Guideline C, Foreign Preference and Guideline
B, Foreign influence.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing. DOHA1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,1
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. On 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed Security
Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8 June 2017.
This decision is issued under the new AG, but I have examined the old AG to ensure that I would not reach
a different result if I issued this decision under the old AG. I would not rule differently under either set of AG.
1
assigned the case to me on September 26, 2017. On October 19, 2017, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing
for January 12, 2018. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  The Government2
introduced GX 1 through 6 into the record without objection. Applicant testified and
presented Applicant Exhibits (AX A-I), but requested that the record remain open for
additional documents. On January 23, 2018, DOHA received a copy of the transcript
(Tr.). The record in this case closed February 2, 2017, as Applicant submitted additional
information, which was entered into the record as AX J.
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegations under Guideline B and Guideline F. She is
a 31-year-old mechanical engineer for a U.S. defense contractor. In 1996, she came to
the United States with her parents when she was 9 years old. The family came from
Nigeria for political asylum. (Tr. 17)  She attended elementary and high school in the
United States. She obtained her undergraduate degree in the Ukraine on a scholarship.
In 2010, she obtained a graduate degree in astronautics engineering. She attended
additional graduate courses in the United States from 2011 to 2012. She became a
naturalized U. S. citizen in  February 2013. (AX I) She is married to a man from Nigeria,
who is a legal permanent resident of the United States and lives with Applicant, and
they have two children who are U.S. citizens. She has been employed with her current
employer since 2014. She has not previously held a clearance. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges, and GX 4-6 substantiate that Applicant has five student loans
amounting to $75,000 which are delinquent. It also alleges that her husband is a citizen
and resident of the Ukraine, which she denies.  She admits that her mother-in-law and
father-in-law are citizens and residents of Nigeria.
Applicant disclosed her financial issues on her SCA. She listed her graduate
student loans and explained that in 2013, she put them “on hold.” She could not find a
steady job after receiving her graduate degree for almost three years She had been
making payments on the various loans. She has submitted documentation that a
student loan servicer is now handling the department of education student loans and the
other student loans. Since she has consolidated the student loans she is making
payments on the interest, but the actual payment is suspended until January 3, 2019.
(AX J) The current payment plan is for Applicant to pay $5 a month for ten months. The
plan is an income-driven plan, which is based on  your yearly income tax return. (Tr.43)
Applicant submitted a budget that reflects spending within her means and saving
money. She earns $58,000 a year and her husband is also employed full time. 
Applicant also submitted a payment history showing the last 12 months with respect to
the student loans and the consolidation. (AX A, B, E and J)
At the hearing, the Government through Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline C, Foreign Preference2
allegations. I have also taken administrative notice of United States (U.S.) Government documents on U.S.
relations with Nigeria, as requested by Department Counsel.
2
Foreign Influence
Applicant was about 9 years of age when she moved to the United States in
1996 with her parents. Applicant’s husband is a permanent legal resident and lives with
her in the United States. (AX G) Her father and mother live in the United States as
naturalized citizens. She has siblings in the United States.  She has no other family in
Nigeria. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law recently received visas. (AX C, D,
and E)  They lived in the United States from July 2017 to November 2017. (Tr. 54) They
are both retired and have no assets in Nigeria. 
Applicant speaks about once a month to her in-laws by phone. They speak about
the health of the family. They do not know about her request for a security clearance.
They have no connections to the Nigerian government or the intelligence community.
Applicant owns a home in the United States. She has two children in the United
States. She would never leave the United States. She is pursuing her professional
dream to work in the field of aerospace engineering. She and her husband have their
professional lives in the United States. Her credit reports show that she has had some
financial difficulty but otherwise the majority of accounts are paid as agreed. She has no
financial interest in Nigeria.
Administrative Notice
Nigeria is a federal republic that gained independence from the United Kingdom
in 1960 after over a century of being under British influence, as a colony, and as a
protectorate. The dominant ethnic group in the northern two-thirds of the country is
Hausa-Fulani, most of whom are Muslims. The Yoruba people, about half of whom are
Christian and the other half Muslin, predominate the southwestern and north-central
regions. It is a key power in Africa due to its size and political and economic role in the
region. It is sub-Saharan Africa’s second largest economy and a major crude oil
producer. Despite its wealth, Nigeria remains underdeveloped. 
Nigeria suffers from political instability, economic crisis, ethnic and religious
conflict, extreme poverty, lack of law and order, judicial corruption and a history of
military coups. Lawless elements have engaged in kidnapping for ransom in the Niger
Delta area. Heavily armed rival militias engage in conflict. The Nigerian government has
committed human rights violations, and security forces have committed political
motivated, extrajudicial killings as well as torture and arbitrary arrest. Boko Haram, an
Islamic extremist, terrorist group, - designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization by
the U.S. State Department in 2013 - operates with near impunity, as the central
government lacks the resources to adequately confront them. Boko Haram has pledged
allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL), and foments instability in
Northern Nigeria, attacking predominately Christian villages, planting car bombs near
markets and government facilities, and abducting young women, forcing them into sex
slavery. The U.S. State Department recommends avoiding travel to certain areas of
Nigeria due to the increased risk of kidnapping, robbery, and other armed attacks. 
3
Nigeria’s foreign policy has been characterized by a focus on Africa and
adherence to several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; peaceful
settlement of disputes; nonalignment and non intentional interference in the internal
affairs of other nations; and regional economic cooperation and development. It has
provided strong diplomatic support to U.S. Government counter-terrorism efforts.
The United States considers its strategic relationship with Nigeria to be among
the most important on the African continent. Relations between the two nations have
steadily improved since 1999, with the resumption of basic democracy in Nigeria. An
estimated one million Nigerians and Nigerian-Americans live, study, and work in the
United States; while over 25,000 Americans live and work in Nigeria. Nigeria is not a
known collector of U.S. intelligence or sensitive economic information. Nigeria is not
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F .4
Applicant has sufficiently mitigated the security concerns. She acknowledges that she
had delinquent student loans that she could not pay immediately as she was
unemployed. She has submitted documentation that confirms her current consolidation
and payment plan for the student loans. (AX J)  
        
Applicant meets some of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations. 
While her financial difficulties are recent, the circumstances which led to her financial
situation are unlikely to recur.  They were arguably due to circumstances beyond her5
control. She did not expect unemployment after obtaining her degree.  Applicant6
submitted proof that she is current and has no other delinquent debts.   She uses a7
budget and saves. Accordingly, I conclude the allegations under Guideline F for 
Applicant.
The Government also established a case for disqualification under Guideline B ,8
but Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an
applicant’s foreign contacts and interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1)
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to
help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S.
interests, or 3) is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign
influence adjudications can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located—including, but not limited to,
whether the country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications9
for access to protected information requires careful assessment of both the foreign
entity’s willingness and ability to target protected information, and to target ex-patriots
who are U.S. citizens to obtain that information, and the individual’s susceptibility to
influence, whether negative or positive. More specifically, an individual’s contacts with
foreign family members (or other foreign entities or persons) raise security concerns
only if those contacts create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
AG ¶184
¶20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
 ¶20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.7
AG¶ 6.8
AG ¶ 6.9
5
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  In addition, security concerns may be raised by10
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information.  Finally, security concerns may be raised by a substantial11
business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or
foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to a heightened risk of
foreign influence or exploitation.12
Considering first the country involved, Nigeria, there is nothing to suggest that
Applicant’s in-laws would make Applicant or her husband likely targets for coercion,
duress, or influence. The Government’s evidence explains the methods used by 
intelligence to pursue U.S. information, and those methods pursue information directly
through infiltration of Government agencies or exile groups. There is no indication
Nigerian agents seek to influence ex-patriate citizens by pressuring their relatives in
Nigeria.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the Government produced sufficient
evidence that there is a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s in-laws in Nigeria.
Applicant’s in-laws have no direct connection to the Nigerian government, and there is
nothing in her connection to them to raise a concern over protecting classified
information. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.
Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States. The nature of a
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are
vulnerable to government coercion. In considering the nature of the government, an
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue.
As noted above, there is no evidence to reflect that Nigeria engages in economic
or industrial espionage. There is however, substantial evidence of terrorist activities
within certain areas of the country. The activities of Nigerian authorities as well as those
insurgent and terrorist groups, the risks of kidnappings by gangs, and the danger of
Boko Haram and other radicalized ISIL sympathizers in Nigeria are sufficient to
establish as “heightened risk” - a risk that is greater than the normal risk inherent in
having a family member living under a foreign government.
AG ¶ 7(a).10
AG ¶ 7(b).11
AG ¶ 7(e).12
6
As to mitigation in this case, Applicant raises mitigating conditions . Applicant’s13
ties to the United States run deep. She owes no duty to any Nigerian entity, and her
immediate family is in the United States. Her extended family connection is minimal.
Further, she has lived in the United States and has  been a U.S. citizen since 1996, and
her commitment to U.S. interests is manifest. She has embraced the United States as
her home in both the personal and professional arena. She has no financial assets in
Nigeria or foreign business contacts. Her contacts with her in-laws are less than typical.
They do not know about her security clearance.  They have no connections to the
Nigerian government or intelligence services. I have no questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance Under these circumstances, I conclude that
it is unlikely Applicant can be pressured based on her in-laws in Nigeria. Accordingly, I
resolve Guideline B for Applicant. 14
 Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-e: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is granted.
                                              
                                             
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b)13
 I have considered the factors under the whole-person at AG ¶ 2(d), including her number of years living in14
the United States and that her husband and children are in the United States, as well as her parents. Her in-
laws have lived in the United States and have visas. Also, she has her professional career in the United
States.
7
