 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00796 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but did not mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 7, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by 
the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.   
 
On December 2, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 6, 2017, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 31, 2017, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals Office (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On March 
2, 2017, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for March 14, 2017. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, did not call witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were received into evidence without objection. On March 22, 
2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 
8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under 
the new AGs, as required.1 
   
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted both of the allegations. Applicant’s 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old information systems security officer employed by a 
defense contractor since January 2015. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance, which is a requirement of his continued employment. He successfully held 
a security clearance at various levels to include a top secret security clearance with 
access to sensitive compartmented information during his U.S. Air Force service, 
discussed below. Applicant did not have a security incident in the 27 years he held a 
security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 12-13, 28-30)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1987. After graduating from high 
school, he attended college briefly and earned approximately eight credit hours. (GE 
1; Tr. 13-15) Applicant served in the Air Force from 1989 to 1996. In 1996, he 
transitioned to the Air National Guard and served until 2013. He retired from active 
duty as a senior master sergeant (pay grade E-8). (GE 1; Tr. 15-17) Applicant held 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
two Air Force Subspecialty Codes, computer maintenance technician and intelligence 
operations specialist. (Tr. 17) Applicant married in August 2001 and divorced five 
months later in December 2001. He has no dependents. (Tr. 18) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists one allegation under this concern: 1.a – that he failed to 
timely file his annual Federal tax returns as required for tax years 2005 through 2015. 
This allegation is established through Applicant’s admission and the Government’s 
exhibits. (GE 1 – 2) Applicant claimed in his August 15, 2016 response to 
interrogatories (RI) that he filed all of his missed years and payments to the IRS were 
up to date. He submitted IRS tax transcripts for tax years 2010 to 2015 that 
corroborated his claim for those tax years. (GE 2) 
 
Applicant stated in his RI that he missed several filing dates for his taxes, which 
was a bad habit he started approximately ten years ago and continued throughout the 
years. He added that once he got behind on filing his tax returns, he was unsure how 
to correct the situation. He promised to timely file his tax returns in the future. (GE 2) 
During his hearing, Applicant testified that he did not have “a really straightforward 
answer. I did not file taxes because they – they just seemed to – I wasn’t good at 
them. I was wasn’t good at them and I wasn’t worried about them, if that makes any 
sense. I wasn’t worried.” (Tr. 19) He further testified that he was owed refunds except 
for one year. He recognizes his mistake stating, “And I kick myself about it every day 
since – since this happened.” (Tr. 19-21, 25-26) 
 
Department Counsel offered two Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interviews (OPM PSI), dated March 23, 2010, and December 16, 2015. (GE 
2) During the March 2010 OPM PSI, Applicant volunteered that he had failed to file his 
2008, 2009, and possibly his 2007 Federal tax returns. During that interview, he 
indicated that he was pressed for time and was aware of the filing requirement adding 
that he “would file the past due statements within the coming month and work 
diligently in the future to keep his tax returns current.” (Tr. 25-26; GE 2)  
 
Applicant provided a letter from his tax preparer that he was in the process of 
preparing his 2016 Federal income tax return. (AE A) 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists one allegation under this concern: 1.b – that he 
deliberately falsified his October 6, 2015 SF-86 by failing to answer truthfully that he 
failed to file his Federal tax returns from 2005 through 2015. This allegation is 
established through Applicant’s admission and the Government’s exhibits (GE 1 – 2) 
 
 Applicant testified, “I honestly don’t remember marking it (referring to SF-86 
question regarding filing of tax returns). If I could think about going back and what 
would be going through my mind, it was – I mean it’s embarrassing.” (Tr. 22) During 
 
4 
 
 
his December 16, 2015 OPM PSI, he volunteered at the onset of his interview that he 
had not filed his Federal income tax returns since the 2005 tax year. (Tr. 27-28; GE 2) 
Applicant stated that he was not trying to hide anything adding that he had contacted a 
tax preparer before his December 2015 OPM PSI. He had filed all of his overdue tax 
returns by February 2016. (Tr. 22-25) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted three reference letters from: (1) president and facility 
security officer of his company, (2) chief executive officer of his company, and (3) 
retired Air Force Colonel and long-time friend. The company president stated, “I have 
always trusted [Applicant] with information and security and I have never found a 
reason to doubt or question him.” The chief executive officer stated, “[Applicant] 
performs his duties in an admirable and professional manner.” The retired Colonel 
stated, “. . . [Applicant] has displayed unrivaled character, integrity, loyalty, and 
professionalism.” All of the references lauded Applicant’s on and off duty performance 
and recommended him for a security clearance. (AE B – D) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
 
5 
 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
 
6 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes one disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax as required.” The record establishes the disqualifying condition in AG 
¶ 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
Three financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
 
7 
 
 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
In regard to the failure to timely file Federal and state income tax returns, the 
DOHA Appeal Board has commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we have noted in the past, a clearance 
adjudication is not directed at collecting debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By the same token, neither is it 
directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a 
proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. 
Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does 
not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & 
Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 
(D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See 
ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 
18, 2015). The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [the applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] 
is now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful 
consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding 
prior behavior evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal 
income tax returns. See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 
2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct 
and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval 
of access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after 
receipt of the SOR).   
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 2 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board 
reversed the grant of a security clearance, and noted the following primary relevant 
disqualifying facts:  
 
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return in December 2013 
and received a $2,074 tax refund. He filed his 2012 Federal tax return in 
September 2014 and his 2013 Federal tax return in October 2015. He 
received Federal tax refunds of $3,664 for 2012 and $1,013 for 2013. 
 
8 
 
 
Notwithstanding the lack of any tax debt owed in ISCR Case No. 15-01031 (App. Bd. 
June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board provided the following principal rationale for 
reversing the grant of a security clearance: 
 
Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government 
rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information.  .  .  .  By failing to file his 
2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, 
Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted access to classified information.  
 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 4 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (citations omitted). Applicant 
provided proof that he “made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or 
pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” and AG ¶ 20(g) 
applies. However, because of Applicant’s lengthy history of noncompliance with 
requirements to timely file tax returns, the mitigation in AG ¶ 20(g) is insufficient to 
alleviate financial considerations security concerns. ISCR Case No. 16-00396 at 3 
(App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017) states: 
 
It is well established, however, that a security clearance adjudication 
does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of the mitigating 
conditions apply to the particular facts of a case. Rather, an adjudication 
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence 
as a whole. Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not 
alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance 
determination. As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence 
as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the 
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully applies to this SOR allegation except for 
AG ¶ 20(g). Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances with regard to 
his taxes by failing to timely file his Federal tax returns from 2005 to 2015. During a 
2010 OPM PSI, he assured the investigator that he would file his then delinquent 
returns only to be confronted with the same issue during a subsequent 2015 OPM 
PSI. Applicant ultimately filed those tax returns in August 2016, but only after being 
prompted by these proceedings.  
 
Applicant’s conduct is somewhat perplexing given that he was a career senior 
Air Force noncommissioned officer, who up until 2005 filed his Federal tax returns. His 
record would suggest that he would not need prompting to follow a civic duty as basic 
as timely filing his Federal income tax returns. His explanations for failing to file tax 
returns for ten years are not convincing. Had he followed through on his promise to 
address the problem at that time, he would in all likelihood not be in his current 
predicament. Given the dim view the DOHA Appeal Board takes of such conduct, 
 
9 
 
 
there is no latitude to rule in Applicant’s favor. Under all the circumstances, he failed to 
establish that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his failure to file his annual Federal tax 
returns from 2005 through 2015. (SOR ¶ 2.c). AG ¶¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
 
10 
 
 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 17(a) fully applies. Applicant completed his SF-86 in October 2015. Some 
two months later during his December 2015 OPM PSI, he volunteered without 
prompting that he failed to file his Federal tax returns from 2005 through 2015. While 
one would expect Applicant, particularly with his background, to be forthright when 
completing an SF-86, his prompt, good-faith effort to correct his falsification before 
being prompted warrants full application of this mitigating condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines F and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old information systems security officer employed by a 
defense contractor since 2015. He served on active duty from 1989 to 2013, and was 
honorably retired as a senior master sergeant (pay grade E-8). He successfully held 
security clearances for 27 years at various levels to include top secret with access to 
sensitive compartmented information.    
 
The general sense from Applicant’s three reference letters is that Applicant is 
knowledgeable, helpful, multi-talented, reliable, trustworthy, conscientious about 
security and compliance with rules, honest, and an excellent representative of his 
company.   
 
The evidence against reinstatement of his security clearance is more 
substantial. He filed his Federal returns for tax years 2005 to 2015 in August 2016. 
Particularly troubling is the fact that Applicant knew as early as March 2010 that his 
failure to file his Federal income returns was a security concern and it was not until the 
initiation of these proceedings that he was prompted to take action. When a tax issue 
is involved, an administrative judge is required to consider how long an applicant waits 
to file his or her tax returns, whether the IRS generates the tax returns, and how long 
the applicant waits after a tax debt arises to begin and complete making payments.2 
The primary problem here is that Applicant has known that he needed to file Federal 
tax returns for a number of years and he waited until February 2016 to file those tax 
returns. His filing of all unfiled tax returns shortly before his hearing is too little too late 
to mitigate security concerns. 
                                                          
2 The recent emphasis of the Appeal Board on security concerns arising from tax cases is 
instructive. See ISCR Case No. 14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (reversing grant of security 
clearance and stating, “His delay in taking action to resolve his tax deficiency for years and then taking 
action only after his security clearance was in jeopardy undercuts a determination that Applicant has 
rehabilitated himself and does not reflect the voluntary compliance of rules and regulations expected of 
someone entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 
2015) (reversing grant of a security clearance, discussing lack of detailed corroboration of 
circumstances beyond applicant’s control adversely affecting finances, noting two tax liens totaling 
$175,000 and garnishment of Applicant’s wages, and emphasizing the applicant’s failure to timely file 
and pay taxes); ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance, noting not all tax returns filed, and insufficient discussion of Applicant’s efforts to resolve tax 
liens). More recently, in ISCR Case No. 14-05476 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) the Appeal Board reversed 
a grant of a security clearance for a retired E-9 and cited applicant’s failure to timely file state tax 
returns for tax years 2010 through 2013 and federal returns for tax years 2010 through 2012. Before his 
hearing, he filed his tax returns and paid his tax debts except for $13,000, which was in an established 
payment plan. The Appeal Board highlighted his annual income of over $200,000 and discounted his 
non-tax expenses, contributions to DOD, and spouse’s medical problems. The Appeal Board 
emphasized “the allegations regarding his failure to file tax returns in the first place stating, it is well 
settled that failure to file tax returns suggest that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-
established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is 
essential for protecting classified information.” Id. at 5 (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2002) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). See also ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 
3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (reversing grant of a security clearance, noting $150,000 owed to the 
federal government, and stating, “A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations to the 
Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.”).  
 
12 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
