 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00947 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire 
                                        For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR 
allegations on October 18, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the 
case on May 24, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of hearing that same day, setting the 
hearing for July 26, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered four documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-4, as well as two hearing exhibits that were accepted without objection as HE 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG were amended and 
are now in effect for any adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. This includes the decision here. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
1-2.2 Applicant offered testimony, three character witnesses, and 13 documents, which 
were accepted without objection as Exs. A-N. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
August 2, 2017, and the record was closed. Based on my review of the documentary 
evidence, testimony given, and Applicant’s demeanor, I find that Applicant mitigated 
drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old systems engineer staff member who has worked for 
the same employer since 2005, the year he earned a bachelor’s degree. He presently 
maintains a security clearance, initially granted in 2006. He works in a drug-free work 
place and has been subject to drug testing at his place of employment. Applicant 
married in 2008. The couple has two pre-school children.  
 
In 2000, Applicant, then age 18 and in high school, first tried marijuana. He then 
used it again in college. During neither period was he a habitual abuser of the drug; his 
marijuana use was infrequent.3 (Tr. 39) In 2005, Applicant began his present 
employment, knowing he was working in a drug-free work-place. In 2005, he applied for 
a security clearance. He was granted a security clearance in March 2006.  
 
In mid-2012, when he was 29 years of age, Applicant went on a vacation with 
some male friends and they rented a condominium. One of those present had a license 
for medical marijuana. (Tr. 38) When marijuana was offered, Applicant consumed the 
drug once. It was his only use of an illegal drug since college. (Tr. 50) He knew 
marijuana was illegal and that he could not both use the drug and hold a security 
clearance. He explained that “[i]t was a mistake. It was . . . an instance where it was 
available and I - - I partook when I shouldn’t have.” (Tr. 49)  
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since March 2012. Applicant is credibly contrite 
and committed to not abuse drugs again. (Tr. 41) Subsequent marriage, fatherhood, 
and maturation have significantly changed his outlook regarding drugs. Applicant no 
longer associates with those who use marijuana, nor does he frequent venues where 
drugs might be available. (Tr. 58-59, 61) Should he ever find himself in the presence of 
drug users, he would leave. (Tr. 62)  
 
                                                          
2 What has been marked and accepted as Ex. 3 was initially offered as Ex. 4. After objection by Applicant, 
the document proffered originally as Ex. 3 was withdrawn, and the remaining documents renumbered 
accordingly.  
 
3 Applicant stated that his frequency of drug use was “very infrequent. It was not even once a year.” (Tr. 
39) In his lifetime, he believes he used marijuana about five to six times over the 12 years at issue. (Tr. 
51) This is not inconsistent with his statement that his past marijuana use “averaged out to once every 
two years” between 2000-2012. (Tr. 53-54, 64) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
To the best of his knowledge, Applicant’s wife has never used drugs. She does 
not condone their use.4 She would have an “extremely negative” reaction should 
anyone expose her preschool children to drugs, a fact Applicant cites as an added 
incentive for him to eschew drugs and those who use them in the future. In addition, 
Applicant has signed a statement indicating that he is aware that any future drug use 
would be considered a violation of any security clearance granted and will be grounds 
for automatic revocation. (Ex. D) 
 
In an SCA completed in 2005, Applicant denied having used illegal drugs in the 
preceding seven years despite the fact he had recently use marijuana in high school 
and college (2000-2005). Applicant describes this inaccuracy as an “erroneous 
mistake.” (Tr. 38-39; 45-46) In contrast, when completing a security clearance 
application (SCA) in September 2015, Applicant disclosed that he had used marijuana 
in the past, noting that he had abandoned all drug use in 2012.  
 
 A senior work peer finds Applicant to be a “trustworthy, straight-up, honest guy.” 
(Tr. 17) He ranks Applicant as a top performer. Applicant’s former supervisor described 
Applicant as a superior employee. Like the rest of Applicant’s leadership team, he 
supports Applicant in this matter. Noting Applicant’s marijuana use in 2012 as a 
“mistake,” this witness has no reservations about Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s college roommate from 2001 to 2003 has never known 
Applicant to use marijuana. He described Applicant as a trustworthy family man “who’s 
worked very hard in his job to move up.” (Tr. 24) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
4 Although Applicant’s use of marijuana in 2012 predated the birth of their children, Applicant noted that 
he has “not heard the end of it” from his wife. (Tr. 61)  
 
 
 
 
4 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. This is because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological 
impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Such use also raised questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant admitted he used marijuana on multiple occasions between 2000 
and 2012. One of those instances occurred after he was granted a security clearance in 
March 2006. This is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse, and ¶ 25(f): 
any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive 
position. The Government’s substantial evidence, as provided by Applicant’s 
admissions, thus raises security concerns under Guideline H. Therefore, the burden 
shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate related 
security concerns.  
 
Under Guideline H, conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
drug involvement and substance misuse are enumerated. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
 
 
 
5 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Applicant’s last illegal use of marijuana, an illegal substance, took place nearly 
six years ago. In the life of this Applicant, in terms of age, maturation, marriage, and 
fatherhood, sufficient time has passed to deem the event as not being recent. Between 
2000 and 2012, he used marijuana about five or six times. I find that his usage was 
infrequent. At the hearing, Applicant was credible and candid. His character references 
described the Applicant of today as a mature, trustworthy family man who excels at his 
work. Applicant has no intention of returning to drugs, or jeopardizing either his 
marriage or his career. I find AG ¶ 26(a) applies. 
 
Since marrying his wife, who has no apparent tolerance for drugs, and then 
becoming a father, Applicant’s attitude toward drugs has evolved. He no longer 
associates with those who use drugs, or attends venues where drugs might be present. 
His focus in life is now exclusively on his career and his family. He provided a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse, 
acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of his 
national security eligibility. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(b)(1)-(3) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, and 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Here, Applicant inaccurately answered “No” on his August 2005 SCA in response 
to a question inquiring whether he had illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example marijuana, since the age of 16 or in the preceding seven years. In truth, 
Applicant had used marijuana on about four or five occasions after the age of 16, 
between 2000 and 2005. He also used marijuana once in 2012, after being granted a 
security clearance in 2006. Consequently, these two disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Potentially 
applicable in this matter is AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, untrustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Here, Applicant exhibited two instances of unreliable conduct reflecting 
questionable judgment. These include the five or six instances he used marijuana 
between 2000 and 2012, and which included his singular use of the drug in 2012 after 
being granted a security clearance. Spread out over a dozen years, his use of 
marijuana was mainly in his high school and college years. Only a singular incident 
occurred in this decade, in 2012, while maintaining a security clearance. His drug use in 
academia could be readily dismissed due to youthful indiscretion from the distant past. 
This is particularly true given its infrequency.  
 
The 2012 incident, however, is of greater concern. In using marijuana at that 
time, he breached the trust extended to him by the Government. He also broke the law 
in using an illegal substance. Since that time, however, Applicant has married, become 
a father, matured, impressed his work peers, and concentrated on his profession. He is 
no longer going for “trips with the boys,” but living a mature lifestyle. This singular event 
is not likely to recur, due to his maturity, his better understanding of what he has to risk 
with his career, and, perhaps most importantly, the potential wrath of his wife, who has 
no tolerance for the drug culture crossing paths with herself or her two very young 
children. The Applicant of today, as he appeared at the hearing and as described by his 
witnesses, is not a thoughtless man who acts on whim. He is genuinely contrite and 
sincere in his promise not to use illegal drugs again. Given all these considerations, I 
find AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past drug involvement and 
personal conduct, I considered his present life, candor, and credible explanations. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old systems engineer staff member who has worked for 
the same employer since 2005. He was granted a security clearance in 2006. He has 
earned a bachelor’s degree. Married in 2008, he has two very young children.  
 
Applicant tried marijuana in high school and in college, up to four or five times in 
total. He refrained from the drug by 2005, obtained a security clearance in 2006, then 
lapsed and used the drug again in early 2012. He has no explanation for this relapse 
except that he was weak while on a vacation with some male friends. Today, he is more 
mature. He has married a woman who does not use marijuana and has no tolerance for 
drugs, especially around their two preschool children. Applicant has turned his focus to 
his family life and his profession. He no longer associates with those who use drugs or 
attends venues were drugs might be found. The passage of six years has brought 
considerable maturity. Similarly, his neglect to mention high school and college 
marijuana use on his 2005 SCA, whether intentional or by mistake, was the result of 
immature or neglectful behavior exhibited more than a decade ago. This failure is 
further reduced in severity by his later, volitional, and candid, disclosure of past drug 
use in 2012. Under these circumstances, I find Applicant has mitigated drug 
involvement and substance misuse, as well as personal conduct, security concerns. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
