 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01863 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
The statement of reasons (SOR) alleges foreign influence and foreign preference 
security concerns relating to Applicant’s possession and use of a Nigerian passport and 
connections to his family and acquaintances living in Nigeria. The foreign preference 
security concerns were withdrawn. The foreign influence security concerns are 
mitigated because of his strong connections to the United States. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF-86). On August 18, 2016, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a SOR to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on 
September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and B (foreign influence).  
 
On September 20, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On November 2, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On March 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On May 19, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for June 14, 2017. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits; Applicant offered 
four exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Transcript (Tr.) 14-17; GE 1-6; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-D) On June 22, 
2017, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. On July 24, 2017, 
Applicant provided corrections to the transcript; there were no objections; and 
Applicant’s corrections are approved. (AE E) 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which are 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs 
supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective on June 8, 2017. I have evaluated 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered a summary for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Nigeria with 
seven attachments. (Tr. 15-19; GE 5; GE 6; I-VII) Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-
02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Applicant provided 
information about Nigeria; there was no objection; and I have briefly summarized 
Applicant’s submitted information in the first paragraph of the Nigeria section, infra. AE 
C. The remainder of the “Nigeria” section is quoted from Department Counsel’s 
administrative notice request (bullet symbols and internal footnotes are omitted).  
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR ¶ 1 alleges and Applicant admitted: that Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen in December 2006, and in September 2010, he renewed his Nigerian passport. 
(¶ 1.a); and in September 2010, he used his Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria in lieu 
of his U.S. passport (¶ 1.b). Applicant did not object to Department Counsel’s motion to 
withdraw the allegations in SOR ¶ 1. (Tr. 8-9) I approved the motion, and the Guideline 
C allegations are withdrawn. (Tr. 9) The foreign preference security concerns will not be 
further discussed in this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
SOR ¶ 2 alleges the following relatives are citizens and residents of Nigeria: his 
mother (¶ 2.a); his sister (¶ 2.b); his uncle (¶ 2.c); and his extended family members (¶ 
2.e). Applicant maintains contacts with high-level Nigerian Government officials (¶ 2.d). 
His uncle is an officer in the Nigerian military and a tribal leader (¶ 2.c). Applicant 
admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c (in part), and 2.e in his response 
to the SOR. He denied that his uncle was an officer in the Nigerian military and that he 
has contacts with high-level Nigerian Government officials. He also provided mitigating 
information. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old engineer employed by a government contractor since 
July 2010. (Tr. 36-37; GE 2) In 1990, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 
mechanical engineering in Nigeria. (Tr. 38-39) In 1994, he received a master’s degree 
in mechanical engineering in the United States. (Tr. 39) In 1997, he received a Ph.D. in 
mechanical engineering in the United States. (Tr. 40) He has not served in the armed 
forces of Nigeria or the United States. (Tr. 42; GE 3) 
 
In 1992, Applicant emigrated from Nigeria to the United States with a student 
visa. (Tr. 18, 38; GE 2) In 2006, he became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 18, 42; GE 2) In 1999, 
he married, and he has a 12-year-old child. (Tr. 41) His spouse was born in the United 
States, and her primary employment is as a homemaker. (Tr. 87-89) 
 
Applicant’s mother, uncle, and half-sister are citizens and residents of Nigeria. 
(Tr. 19, 24) He is estranged from his mother and half-sister. (Tr. 20) He said sometimes 
he has had frequent contacts with his mother and other times he may go for months 
without communicating with her. (Tr. 58-59) His contacts with his half-sister were 
reduced after Applicant’s parents divorced. (GE 3) He is not aware of his half sister’s 
current name, marital status, profession, or address. (Tr. 20; SOR response) He was 
unsure about whether he would receive an inheritance when his mother passes away. 
(Tr. 59) His mother is retired. (GE 2) He said his mother lived in a very dangerous area 
of Nigeria because it has a serious problem with crime. (Tr. 59; GE 2) However, she 
moved, and he is not aware of whether this area is safe. (Tr. 60) After Applicant’s father 
died, his mother remarried. (Tr. 60) Applicant’s father never served in the Nigerian 
military. (Tr. 55) He said he did not know whether his mother was still married, and if 
                                            
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
she is still married, where her spouse resides. (Tr. 60) He suggested that her spouse 
could be a citizen and resident of the United States. (Tr. 60)    
 
Applicant’s uncle is a tribal leader. (Tr. 24) His uncle’s power is very limited, and 
he does not receive a salary for his leadership role in the tribe. (Tr. 25) In 1985 or 1986, 
his uncle retired from the Army. (Tr. 25-26, 28, 46) His uncle had a close high-ranking 
friend who was removed from his high-level military office, and at that time, Applicant’s 
uncle retired from the Army. (Tr. 45-46) His uncle has separated himself from his former 
Army associates. (Tr. 26) He became a tribal leader around 1996. (Tr. 44) His uncle has 
access to high-level Nigerian officials. (Tr. 44) His uncle receives protection from 
Nigerian police and security guards. (Tr. 44-45) Sometimes his mother and uncle visit 
the United States and do not visit Applicant. (Tr. 27; AE D)    
 
Besides his uncle, Applicant had limited contacts with another retired high-
ranking Army officer and tribal leader. (Tr. 28) His only in-person contact with this tribal 
leader was two years ago at the funeral of Applicant’s father in 2015. (Tr. 29, 53, 55, 61) 
He communicated with the tribal leader on the telephone several times over the past 
two years. (Tr. 29) He has not communicated with the tribal leader for about one year. 
(Tr. 29, 54)  
 
Applicant’s cousin has connections to the Nigerian Government; however, 
Applicant’s most recent contact with his cousin was seven years ago. (Tr. 44-45) In 
2016, Applicant had contact with a Nigerian legislator who is also Applicant’s spouse’s 
distant relative. (Tr. 52) He has about $100 in a Nigerian bank account. (Tr. 83)  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a U.S. citizen, and his father-in-law is deceased. (Tr. 
51, 64) Two of Applicant’s spouse’s sisters reside in the United States. (Tr. 52, 63) 
Applicant’s brother resides in the United States, and Applicant’s most recent contact 
with his brother was in 2015. (Tr. 58, 61) His brother who resides in the United States 
may be a Canadian citizen. (Tr. 62)  
 
Applicant traveled to Nigeria in 2005, 2010, 2015, and 2016. (Tr. 56-57) His stays 
in Nigeria have been for about two weeks. (Tr. 57) He has a half brother who was born 
in the United States and may reside in Nigeria. (Tr. 62) Applicant has several cousins, 
some in-laws of his mother-in-law, and two friends living in Nigeria. (Tr. 65-74) He has 
not had any contact with some of them since 2015 at his father’s funeral, no contact 
with others for about two years, or contact with some of them once or twice in a year. 
(Tr. 66-74) He is not aware of their ages, current addresses, or employers. (Tr. 66-74; 
GE 3 at 6-8) 
 
Applicant and his spouse own two homes in the United States. (Tr. 79-80) Their 
net worth in the United States is about $550,000. (Tr. 86) His annual salary is about 
$115,000. (Tr. 98) He votes in U.S. elections. (Tr. 81) He is involved in his U.S. church, 
a U.S. professional organization, and his U.S. community. (Tr. 82-83) 
 
Applicant indicates the primary security concern in Nigeria is with Boko Haram, 
which focuses on attacking females with educations and people who wear trousers and 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
shirts. (Tr. 75-78) Boko Haram does not seek U.S. technology or conduct espionage 
against the United States. (Tr. 75) Boko Haram’s attacks are primarily in Northern 
Nigeria. (Tr. 75) Applicant’s family in Nigeria is located in Southern Nigeria. (Tr. 75)  
 
Applicant presented information about various U.S. leaders in the Executive 
Branch with foreign connections from former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to 
Presidents Barack Obama and Donald Trump to show their important contributions to 
the United States and trustworthiness. (AE C) He also provided press releases from 
U.S. Homeland Security, which indicate at times there has been a high risk of terrorism 
in the United States. (AE C)    
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s friend and work colleague has known him since 1995, and he 
believes Applicant is a diligent, honest, and loyal U.S. citizen. (Tr. 33-35; AE A at 1) A 
university professor has known Applicant since 1995, and he describes Applicant as 
having “good moral character” and being loyal to the United States. (AE A at 2) Their 
statements support approval of his access to classified information.  
 
Nigeria 
 
The United States and Nigeria have ongoing high-level meetings involving 
international affairs, trade, improvement of governance, democracy, economic growth, 
and counter terrorism. President Trump has met with the President of Nigeria to discuss 
these issues. The United States wishes to increase military sales to Nigeria. The United 
States and Nigeria have strong relationships in many areas, especially in trade.  
 
The country has faced intermittent political turmoil and economic crises since 
independence. Political life has been scarred by conflict along ethnic, geographic, and 
religious lines, and corruption and misrule have undermined the authority and legitimacy 
of the state. Congress regularly monitors Nigerian political developments and has 
expressed concerns with corruption, human rights abuses, and environmental damage 
in the Delta, as well as with the threat of violent extremism in Nigeria. 
 
Corruption in Nigeria is “massive, widespread, and pervasive,” according to the 
U.S. State Department, and by many accounts, the country’s development will be 
hampered until it can address the perception of impunity for corruption and fraud. 
Human Rights Watch suggests that Nigeria’s political system rewards rather than 
punishes corruption, which has been fueled by oil revenues for decades. 
 
The most serious human right problems during 2014 were those committed by 
the militant sect known by the name of Boko Haram, which conducted numerous 
attacks on government and civilian targets throughout the country, resulting in 
thousands of deaths and injuries, widespread destruction, forced internal displacement 
of an estimated 1.8 million, and the flight of more than 100,000 refugees to neighboring 
countries. In its response to Boko Haram, and at times to crime in general, security 
services perpetrated extrajudicial killings and engaged in torture, rape, arbitrary 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
detention, mistreatment of detainees, and destruction of property. The country also 
suffered from widespread societal violence, including ethnic, regional, and religious 
violence. Other serious human rights problems included vigilante killings and official 
corruption. The Civilian Joint Task Force (C-JFT) continued to recruit children and 
commit extrajudicial killings. The government took few steps to investigate or prosecute 
officials who committed violations, whether in the security forces or elsewhere in the 
government. Authorities did not investigate or punish the majority of police or military 
abuse. 
 
Nigerian security forces, particularly the police, have been accused of serious 
human rights abuses. In 2007, a U.N. report indicated that torture is an intrinsic part of 
how law enforcement services operate within the country and called on the Nigerian 
Government to criminalize the practice. Nigerian officials have acknowledged some 
abuses; in 2010, the country’s police minister called the situation “condemnable and 
unacceptable,” but few security personnel have been prosecuted for abuses.  
 
Boko Haram, a violent Nigerian Islamist movement, has grown increasingly 
active and deadly in its attacks against state and civilian targets in recent years. The 
group’s April 2014 abduction of almost 300 schoolgirls has drawn international attention.  
Periodic attacks against foreign targets in the region and growing evidence of ties to Al 
Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a regional terrorist network affiliated with Al Qaeda, have 
also raised the concern of U.S. policymakers. The State Department named several 
individuals linked to Boko Haram, including its leader, as Specially Designated Global 
Terrorists in 2012, and Boko Haram was designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization 
by the U.S. State Department in November 2013. More than 4,000 people are estimated 
to have been killed in Boko-Haram related violence, making it one of the deadliest 
terrorist groups in the world. In 2014, Boko Haram carried out kidnappings, killings, 
bombings, and attacks on civilian and military targets in northern Nigeria, resulting in 
nearly 5,000 deaths, many injuries, tens of thousands of displaced civilians, and 
significant destruction of property. In May, the Nigerian government renewed a State of 
Emergency. Despite the increased military presence in the region, Boko Haram 
continued to attack schools and take over large and small towns. 
 
*  *  * 
 
 Kidnappings remain a security concern throughout the country. Criminal 
elements throughout Nigeria orchestrate kidnappings for ransom; Islamic extremists, 
operating predominantly in the North, also have been known to conduct kidnappings. 
Criminals or militants have abducted foreign nationals, including U.S. citizens, from off-
shore and land-based oil facilities, residential compounds, airports, and public 
roadways. In 2015, six U.S. citizens were kidnapped in separate incidents.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s mother, half sister, uncle, and extended family members are citizens 
and residents of Nigeria. His contacts with all of these relatives, except for his mother, 
are minimal, infrequent, and not recent. Applicant’s contacts with his mother have varied 
from frequent3 to infrequent. Currently Applicant’s contacts with his mother are 
infrequent (two or less contacts in the past two years). He did not establish that his 
contacts with his mother would continue to be infrequent. He may reconcile with her at 
any time, and there is a strong presumption that he cares about his mother’s well being 
or welfare. The degree of contact with one’s relatives is a demonstration of the care and 
concern for one’s relatives; however, it is not the only measure of care and concern.  
 
Applicant’s uncle is a former Army officer and tribal leader in Nigeria. He has very 
limited contacts with his uncle, and he has not communicated with his uncle for two 
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
years. Applicant also had contact with a former Nigerian official; however, his contacts 
were infrequent and are not recent. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, 
if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case 
No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Nigeria with the United States, 
places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his relationship with his mother does not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives living in Nigeria.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Nigeria 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
mother, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable 
state intelligence services, and Nigeria has a serious problem with terrorism. Applicant’s 
relationship with his mother creates a potential conflict of interest because terrorists 
could place pressure on his mother in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise 
classified information. His relationship with his mother creates “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationship with his mother in 
Nigeria and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of 
any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) applies. At times in the past, Applicant had frequent contact with his 
mother, who is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. He may have frequent contacts with her 
in the future. There is a strong presumption that a person has care and concern for the 
welfare of their mother. Nigeria remains a dangerous place. A key factor in the AG ¶ 
8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S.” Applicant has resided in the United States for 25 years, and his wife and child are 
U.S. citizens. He and his spouse have relatives in the United States. The net worth of 
their U.S. property is about $550,000 and his annual pay for his U.S. employment is 
about $115,000.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with and connections to the United States must be 
weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with and 
connections to relatives who are citizens and residents of Nigeria. His mother, half 
sister, uncle, and extended family members are citizens and residents of Nigeria. Like 
every other resident of Nigeria, they are at risk from terrorists and criminals. Applicant is 
not close to his relatives in Nigeria, and currently, his contacts with them are infrequent. 
He is much closer to his family in the United States, and he has strong connections to 
them.    
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Nigeria are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, family living in the United States, and U.S. citizenship are important 
factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. He has minimal financial 
connections to Nigeria. He has only four visits to Nigeria in the previous 10 years. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline B are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Nigeria must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Nigeria, as well as the dangers existing in Nigeria.4 While there 
is no evidence Nigeria is a collector of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic 
information, Nigeria has very serious economic, military, political, judicial/legal and 
social problems. Crime and terrorism are particularly serious concerns. Nigeria and the 
United States are closely related in trade and diplomacy. The United States is assisting 
Nigeria in counter-terrorism endeavors.  
    
Applicant was born in Nigeria, and he attended schools through the bachelor’s 
degree level in Nigeria. His mother, half sister, uncle, and extended family members are 
citizens and residents of Nigeria. His uncle is a former Army officer and tribal leader in 
Nigeria. He has very limited contacts with his uncle, and he has not communicated with 
his uncle in two years. Applicant is not aware of any relatives currently employed by the 
Nigerian Government. Applicant’s only significant relationship with anyone living in 
Nigeria is with his mother. His relationship with his mother is currently estranged, but 
could return to a close relationship.  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States from Nigeria in 1992, and he became a 
U.S. citizen in 2006. He received his master’s degree and Ph.D. in the United States. 
His spouse and child are U.S. citizens. His employment and investments are in the 
United States. His character witnesses’ descriptions support approval of his security 
clearance.  
 
The possibility of attempted exploitation of Applicant through his family in Nigeria 
is low. Terrorists in Nigeria and the Nigerian Government do not have a history of 
seeking U.S. classified or sensitive information through the exploitation of Nigerian 
relatives. Applicant’s strong connections to the United States and especially to his U.S. 
family, community and employment establish “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., [that he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interest.”   
 
After weighing the evidence of his connections to Nigeria and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of 
mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated. 
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    WITHDRAWN 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
