KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence.  He argues that
he has minimal contact with his family members in Kyrgyzstan,and that he has applied for his
wife and stepson to immigrate to the U.S. The Judge, however, made findings about those
matters. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-02605.a1
DATE: 02/26/2018
DATE: February 26, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02605
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 10, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On November 8, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 40 years old, served in the military as an enlisted member and officer.  He
was charged in a nonjudicial punishment proceeding with adultery and other offenses.  He was
administratively separated with a general discharge under honorable conditions.  Since
approximately 2010, he has worked for Federal contractors in different countries.  In 2012 and 2013,
he worked in Kyrgyzstan.  He currently works in a Middle Eastern country.
In 2014, Applicant married for the third time.  His wife was born in Russia and is a citizen
and resident of Kyrgyzstan.  She moved to Kyrgyzstan as a child, but has relatives in Russia.
Applicant has a 10-year-old stepson who is a citizen and resident of Kyrgyzstan.  Applicant believes
that all parental rights between the natural father and his stepson have been terminated.  Applicant
and his wife also have a three-year-old son who is a citizen of the United States, but resides with his
mother in Kyrgyzstan. 
Applicant’s wife works in a factory in Kyrgyzstan.  He provides her regular financial
support.  He sees her twice a year for two or three weeks.  His wife’s mother is a citizen and resident
of Kyrgyzstan.  She does not work for the government.  Neither he nor his wife provide her mother
any support.  His wife and her mother have regular contact.  
Applicant has applied for U.S. immigration visas for his wife and stepson.  Their I-130
petition, which is the first step in helping a relative immigrate to the U.S., was approved.  His wife
needs to submit additional paperwork and schedule an interview.  His work contract was scheduled
to be completed in late 2017, and he then intended to complete the immigration process for his
family.
Kyrgyzstan, a former Soviet Republic, is now a parliamentary republic. As of 2016, it has
experienced human rights problems.  Since the events in Ukraine in 2014, the U.S. Director of
National Intelligence has assessed that Russia is increasing its presence in the region and
accelerating a shift in which it is the uncontested influence there.  In 2017, the U.S. State
Department assessed Kyrgyzstan’s capital as being a medium-threat location for terrorist activity
directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests, and a high-threat for political violence. 
The Judge’s Analysis
Kyrgyzstan has terrorism and human rights issues that raise concerns.  Applicant’s ties with
his wife, stepson, and mother-in-law create a heightened risk of foreign influence and potential
conflict of interest.   While Applicant has applied for his wife and stepson to immigrate to the United
States, they remain in Kyrgyzstan.  There is limited information about his wife’s prior work history
and her potential ties in Kyrgyzstan.  The Judge was not able to find that it is unlikely that Applicant
would be placed in a position of having to choose between his foreign family members and the
interests of the United States.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the SOR allegation
pertaining to his son who is a U.S. citizen and against Applicant on the allegations pertaining to his
wife, stepson, and mother-in-law.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence.  He argues, for
example, that he has minimal contact with his family members in Kyrgyzstan, that he has applied
for his wife and stepson to immigrate to the U.S., and that there is no evidence that his family knows
any specifics about his job.  The Judge, however, made findings about the amount of contact
Applicant has with his family in Kyrgyzstan and about the status of the immigration petition for his
wife and stepson.  His arguments are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the record evidence nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in
a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01717 at
4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2017).   Applicant cites to a Hearing Office decision that is distinguishable from
the case at hand because, among other reasons, it dealt with a different foreign country.1 
Additionally, Hearing Office decisions are not binding precedent on other Hearing Office judges or
the Appeal Board.  Id.  Moreover, we find no basis for concluding the Judge erred in her whole-
person analysis.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
1 See, Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 6, which states in part, “Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should
consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such
as whether it is known to target U.S. citizen to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
