 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00490 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate financial responsibility and that his financial 
problems have been resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his 2014 security 
clearance application (SCA) to hide his financial problems. Personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on August 22, 2014. After reviewing the information 
gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
a statement of reasons (SOR) on August 5, 2016, alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant 
answered the SOR on August 24, 2016, and requested a decision on the written record, 
in lieu of a hearing.  
 
After receipt of the file of relevant materials (FORM) in October 2016, Applicant 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me on April 21, 2017, and issued a 
notice of hearing on May 3, 2017, setting the hearing for May 17, 2017. At the hearing, 
 
2 
 
 
the Government offered seven exhibits (GE 1 through 7). GE 6 and 7, the FORM and a 
discovery letter (respectively), were marked and made part of the record, but not 
admitted as evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted no 
documents even though I offered to leave the record open for him to supplement the 
record. GE 1 though 5 were admitted as evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 26, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in the SOR (1.c - 1.q). He denied 
falsifying his 2014 SCA (SOR 2.a – 2.b), and claimed that his failure to disclose his 
financial problems was a mistake. (SOR Answer) His admissions to the SOR and at his 
hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old senior electrician who was employed with a federal 
contractor. He lost his position when his interim clearance was withdrawn pending 
adjudication of the SOR concerns. His then-employer is still sponsoring Applicant’s 
clearance application. His employment is conditioned on his eligibility for a clearance.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school and completed some vocational education. 
He married his wife in 2003, and he has a 10-year-old daughter and two grown step-
sons, one of whom is serving in the Marine Corps. Applicant believes he was granted a 
facility access clearance when he worked at a correctional facility in 2013. This is his 
first SCA for a DOD clearance. 
 
Applicant was employed between June 2001 and November 2012. He stated that 
he left his employment due to family problems. He was unemployed between December 
2012 and February 2014. He worked for a federal contractor between March 2014 and 
December 2016. Applicant has been unemployed and underemployed since December 
2016. His wife is working and helps to pay the family’s living expenses. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether he had any financial problems. Specifically, he was asked whether during the 
preceding seven years he had: filed a petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy 
code, a judgment entered against him, defaulted on any type of loans, property 
repossessed or foreclosed, and had any debts turned over to a collection agency. 
Applicant answered “No” to all the financial questions. He failed to disclose that: he filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 2010, had defaulted on a mortgage loan and the 
home was repossessed, had a judgment entered against him in 2012, and had 
accumulated all the delinquent or in collection accounts alleged in the SOR. 
 
All of the accounts alleged in the SOR are established by the record evidence 
and Applicant’s admissions. Concerning his Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in 1995, 
Applicant explained that he developed financial problems because he was young and 
immature. The next 10-15 years he worked mostly side jobs, but he did not have steady 
 
3 
 
 
employment. He tried to open a garage business. He was employed between 2001 and 
2012, making at best $16 an hour.  
 
Applicant testified he filed for bankruptcy in 2010 because of family problems. He 
noted that he was getting behind on his bills, he was travelling 45 miles each way to get 
to work, made a few bad financial decisions, and was financially overwhelmed. (Tr. 26-
27) Applicant initially filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was converted to a Chapter 13 
reorganization in May 2010. The bankruptcy was dismissed in October 2011 because of 
Applicant’s failure to make the scheduled payments, provide a tax transcript, and turn 
over the proceeds of a tax refund to the trustee.  
 
SOR 1.c through 1.q allege many of the accounts included in the 2010 
bankruptcy filing. The bankruptcy was dismissed and those accounts are still 
delinquent. Applicant had medical problems, including surgery around 2013 that 
prevented him from working for close to a year. Because he was unemployed, Applicant 
had no medical insurance. He was not covered under his wife’s work medical insurance. 
He claimed he believed his medical debts were being paid though a state medical card 
(Medicaid), and he did not know about all the delinquent medical bills until he received 
the SOR. (Tr. 32-34) 
 
Applicant was employed between March 2014 and December 2016. He claimed 
that during that period he made some calls to his creditors to try to resolve or pay some 
of his debts. Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to corroborate his claims of 
efforts to remain in contact with his creditors, to pay, or to otherwise resolve his 
delinquent debts or the 2012 judgment. He presented no documentary evidence of any 
payments made, payment agreements, or that he disputed or resolved any of the SOR 
accounts.  
 
Concerning his defaulted mortgage loan and home foreclosure (SOR 1.c), 
Applicant testified the house was foreclosed in about December 2015, and later sold in 
auction. He believes that he owes no delinquent balance. (Tr. 31) Concerning the 2012 
judgment entered against him (SOR 1.j), Applicant claimed he paid the rent in cash, but 
did not ask for a receipt. Sometime later, the creditor filed an action in court to recover 
the unpaid rent. He testified he was not aware about the lawsuit or the judgment until 
after it was entered against him. 
 
Concerning his failure to disclose his financial problems in his 2014 SCA, 
Applicant explained that this is the first SCA he ever completed, and he did not know 
how to fill it out. Except for his wife’s assistance, Applicant had no help to complete the 
SCA. He believed he did not have to disclose his 2010 bankruptcy filing because it was 
dismissed. He claimed he did not know about the 2012 judgment, the delinquent 
accounts, and the accounts turned over to collection agencies. He provided no 
explanation for his failure to disclose the defaulted mortgage loan and the repossessed 
home.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant noted that his current financial situation is not good. He and his wife 
are having difficulty making ends meet because he has been unemployed or 
underemployed since December 2016. He loves his job and loves working for the 
Government. Applicant credibly professed his love for the United States. He promised to 
consolidate and pay all of his delinquent accounts if he gets a clearance and is allowed 
to return to work. Presently, he does not have the money to pay the SOR debts. As of 
his hearing, he had not participated in any financial counseling. However, he promised 
to do so when he gets his job back. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be a good and dedicated worker. He also believes 
that he is responsible and mature enough to hold a clearance. He repeatedly testified 
that he is not a security risk. He noted that his father was killed serving the United 
States in Vietnam and his two brothers served in the military. He would like the 
opportunity to do his best working for the Government. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s long history of failing to pay his debts is documented in the record. 
The SOR debts are established by the credit reports in evidence and by Applicant’s 
admissions. He filed for bankruptcy in 1995 and again in 2010, and has continued to 
have financial problems to present. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to 
satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record 
established the above disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s long-term 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. There is some evidence to establish that 
part of his financial problems resulted from circumstances beyond his control such as 
his periods of unemployment and underemployment and his medical problems. Even 
so, Applicant presented no evidence of good-faith efforts to remain in contact with his 
creditors, to pay any of his debts, or to otherwise resolve his delinquent accounts. There 
is no evidence to show Applicant was financially responsible under his circumstances. 
There is no evidence he participated in financial counseling. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2014 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he had financial problems that included filing for bankruptcy, a 
2012 judgment entered against him, a defaulted mortgage loan, a repossessed home, 
and numerous delinquent and in collection accounts. Applicant’s omissions, if 
deliberate, would trigger the applicability the following disqualifying condition under AG 
¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
age, education, work experience, and his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I find 
that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the 
 
8 
 
 
Government. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. Additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions is required. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. 
The financial questions in Section 26 of the 2014 SCA are straight forward and easy to 
understand. Assuming, for argument purposes, that Applicant believed he did not have 
to disclose the dismissed bankruptcy, and that he did not know about the 2012 
judgment, there is still no reasonable explanation for his failure to disclose his numerous 
other accounts that were delinquent or in collection. Applicant knew he had not paid any 
of the delinquent accounts he declared in his dismissed 2010 bankruptcy petition, and 
that those accounts were still outstanding. He disclosed not even one delinquent 
account. 
 Applicant also knew he had defaulted on his mortgage loan, and that his home 
was foreclosed. Notwithstanding, he failed to disclose those events even though the 
 
9 
 
 
SCA questions specifically asked about them. Applicant elected to mislead the 
government about his financial situation and indicated he had no financial problems or 
any delinquent debts. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant deliberately 
falsified his 2014 SCA. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate financial responsibility and that his financial 
problems have been resolved or are under control. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his 2014 SCA to cover 
his financial problems. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
