 
  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 16-02684 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
     MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has overcome the personal conduct concerns raised in the SOR.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) as a part of his security clearance application. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to 
continue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
dated October 21, 2016, detailing security concerns for personal conduct under 
Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. This case was decided under the new guidelines that 
became effective on June 8, 2017. These guidelines superseded the former guidelines 
that had been in effect since September 1, 2006. My decision in this case would be the 
same under the 2006 or 2017 guidelines. 
 
 
  2 
 
Applicant submitted his notarized answer to the SOR on November 3, 2016. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 20, 2015, for a hearing on November 27, 
2017. At the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE) 1-11 were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant and six witnesses testified. Applicant’s 14 
exhibits (AE) A through N were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on December 5, 2017; the record closed the same day.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
 At the outset of the hearing, a discussion was conducted regarding SOR 1.a 
alleging Applicant’s omission of information from Section 13A (on the job discipline or 
warning) of his e-QIP, which he certified on June 14, 2015. I asked Department Counsel 
how SOR 1.l (four written reprimands between April 2010 and February 2016) could be 
included in the purview of the SOR 1.a (e-QIP June 14, 2015), when at least one or 
more alleged events in SOR 1.l occurred after the June 2015 e-QIP certification date. 
The last of the allegation reads: 
 
 “subparagraphs 1.b through 1.i and, 1.l below.” 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the last line to: 
 
 “subparagraphs 1.b through 1.i, and 1.l (through June 14, 2015, the date of the e-
QIP) 
  
Applicant had no objection to the modification and the motion to amend was granted. 
(Tr. 8-12) 
 
 The second topic of discussion was the applicability of the AG disqualifying 
conditions for personal conduct to the allegations of the SOR. Department Counsel 
explained that the SOR 1.a, the subparagraph stating the falsification allegation (citing 
the other subparagraphs SOR 1.b-1.i, and 1.l) falls within the scope of AG ¶ 16(a) of 
Guideline E. SOR 1.b-1.l do not allege any type of falsification, but rather constitute rule 
violations as referenced in AG ¶ 16(d)(3). Applicant expressed a different reading of the 
SOR. He submits that SOR 1.a alleges only that he deliberately falsified the June 2015 
e-QIP by omitting allegations 1.b though 1.l. He does not believe he was provided 
adequate notice that SOR 1.b-1.l have independent significance as rule violations under 
AG ¶ 16(a)(3). I agree with Department Counsel’s reading of the SOR. The Government 
has never cited the specific disqualifying conditions under Guideline E along with a 
specific SOR allegation. Applicant’s objection based on the lack of notice to SOR 1.b-1.l 
as also representing rule violations was overruled. (Tr. 12-18) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges two types of conduct under the personal conduct guideline. The 
first type of conduct is the deliberate concealment (AG ¶ 16(a)) of relevant facts under 
SOR 1.a (citing SOR 1.b-1.i, and 1.l (including only infractions between April 2010 and 
 
  3 
 
the June 2015 e-QIP). The SO1.b-1.l conduct constitutes rule violations within AG ¶ 
16(d)(3). Applicant denied all allegations. After a full review of the record, I make the 
following factual findings. In assessing the credibility of Applicant’s testimony, I have 
considered that because English is not his native language, his awkward use of words 
and phrases resulted in some communication problems. ISCR Case No. 97-0356 at 2 
(App. Bd. April 21, 1998) 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He was born in Ghana where he married his wife in 
1981 and received a bachelor’s degree. He immigrated to the United States in 2004 and 
became a naturalized citizen in 2009. He received a master’s degree later in the same 
year. He has five sons whose ages are 35, 33, 32, 24, and 20. His daughter is 28 years 
old. He has owned his own home since 2012. He has been a security officer for a 
defense contractor since February 2010. His job history includes truck driving and 
employment in several positions at an airport. Applicant testified he has had a security 
clearance for seven years, but his June 2015 e-QIP indicates that he never had a 
security clearance. (Tr. 6-14, 48, 123) 
 
 Applicant’s coworker (Witness A) has been a security officer with their employer 
for nine years, and has held a security clearance since 2008. He has worked with 
Applicant for six years. After identifying the employer’s work place regulations and 
disciplinary actions, Witness A explained that the disciplinary policy operates on a 
calendar year basis with work place infractions being removed from an employee’s 
disciplinary history record after a year, rather than being carried forward into the next 
calendar year. An employee is permitted six late-to-work violations in a year before 
disciplinary action is taken. Violations of infractions in different categories may be 
considered a pattern of violations. Witness A believes Applicant is usually punctual in 
arriving to work. He never had any reason to doubt Applicant’s integrity and vouches for 
his honesty. (GE 2-10; GE 2-10; AE K at 6; Tr. 24-43) 
 
 Witness A explained the difference between an infraction and a security violation. 
An infraction is a company violation when a security officer is late to work, or is at his 
post without a radio,1 or at his post without a hat. A security violation involves the 
federal agency (State Department) directly. An example of a security violation occurs 
when a contractor security officer leaves his post in the State Department building 
without being officially relieved, and a person without authority, enters the building. That 
type of offense would be investigated as a security violation by the State Department 
Diplomatic Security. (Tr. 24-43) 
 
 Witness B has been a security officer and has held as security clearance for 11 
years. He has known Applicant for five to seven years through their work assignments 
at Department of State buildings. His understanding of the employer’s discipline policy 
(removal of work infraction after a year) is the same as Witness A. Applicant’s telephone 
number would not be stored in Witness B’s cellphone directory if he did not have high 
                                            
1 The radio, which is issued to the officer at the beginning of his shift, can be used to 
communicate with other security officers, the supervisor, or the command center at the main Department 
of State building. An officer could make emergency calls if required.  (Tr. 40-42)   
 
  4 
 
quality character. Based on his military background, Witness B is testifying in 
Applicant’s behalf because he believes Applicant is an honest person who warrants a 
security clearance. (Tr. 43-58) 
 
 Applicant’s pastor (Witness C) has a master’s degree and a doctorate in divinity. 
He has been a pastor for 25 years. He is semi-retired currently because of a disability. 
He is married with three adult-aged children. He has known Applicant for about 17 
years, 4 years in Ghana and 13 years in the United States. Applicant is an elder, one of 
three elders who assist Witness C in administering various church activities offered by 
the church, including preaching sermons. To qualify as an elder, one must: be 
respected by the congregation and in the community as a trustworthy leader; be able to 
teach the bible; be friendly and honest; and, be able to represent the church in area and 
regional conferences. As an elder, Applicant is in charge of the family life department 
that provides counseling or intervention in marital and family issues. Applicant has been 
a very good elder for many years. Witness C identified two undated photographs of 
Applicant preaching sermons at the Saturday church service. He also identified a 
photograph of Applicant (appearing on behalf of Witness C) standing with the 
organizational leader of an important regional church conference. (AE H, I, J; Tr. 58-68) 
 
 Witness C’s knowledge of the issues at the hearing was limited. Applicant 
indicated that he was filling out a form (Witness C never saw the form) and there was 
some area in the form that he did not understand. Because of the honesty and 
trustworthiness Applicant has demonstrated as an elder in the church over the years, 
Witness B opined that he would not willfully mislead the Government. (Tr. 68-71) 
 
 Witness D is married with children. He has known Applicant since 2007 when 
they met at the church in 2007. Witness D and Applicant have worked as elders for the 
past four years. As an elder, Applicant directs the prayer ministry on Wednesday.  He 
conducts family counseling and teaches the bible. He organizes youth activities and 
represents the church in regional activities. Regarding the issues involved at the 
hearing, Applicant indicated to Witness D that the former did not put some information 
on a security form because his employer told him that after a year, the information does 
not need to be on the form. In their ten-year friendship, Witness D admires Applicant’s 
truthfulness and dedication. (AE J; Tr. 72-83) 
 
 Witness E, Applicant’s son, is 34 years old and married with one young son.  He 
has held a security clearance since 2013. Witness E lives with Applicant to help them 
financially and to assist in raising his younger siblings. As a reverse engineer in 
information technology (IT) for the past five years, he investigates malicious computer 
codes. During Witness E’s security investigation, Applicant helped him fill out the 
security form, emphasizing the importance of answering all questions truthfully and 
accurately. While growing up in Applicant’s household, Applicant has instilled the 
importance of honesty, hard work, and taking responsibility. When Applicant was filling 
out his security form (as he told Witness E), he asked his supervisors about his 
(disciplinary) write-ups that he had compiled during the period (circa April 2010 to June 
 
  5 
 
2015). A supervisor told him that he did not need to put any write-up on the form that 
was more than a year old. (Tr. 83-103) 
 
 Witness F, Applicant’s wife, a naturalized United States (U.S.) citizen, has been 
married to Applicant for 36 years. All her five sons and one daughter are U.S. citizens. 
Witness E, three other sons, and one daughter live with Applicant. After identifying 
family photographs in various settings, Witness F testified about Applicant’s work in the 
church.  As an elder, Applicant organizes church programs. He is a marriage counselor 
and conducts interventions in other family issues. As a husband, he is truthful, honest, 
responsible, and a stable family man. (AE A-G, J; Tr. 103-118) 
 
 As a security officer for the last seven years, Applicant maintains his assigned 
building. One of his assignments is prevent criminals from entering the building. 
Applicant responds to emergencies like fire alarms and 911 calls for assistance. (Tr. 
118-126) 
 
 SOR 1.b – May 2010: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for failure to carry 
out assigned tasks by allowing a visitor in the building without proper identification. 
Applicant accepted copies of identification when no reproductions of any type were 
allowed. Though he believed that the reprimand was unwarranted, he and another 
security officer received the reprimand. The assistant deputy manager explained that a 
second violation of the same offense would be a two-day suspension. Applicant did not 
repeat this offense within a 12-month period or the period between April 2010 and June 
2015. (GE 2; Tr. 126-130) 
 
 SOR 1.c – January 2011: Applicant received a letter of counseling for a non-
medical call off. Applicant remembered it was snowing. He told his supervisor by phone 
(as he always does) that he was going to be late because of the poor road conditions 
caused by the snow. (GE 3; Tr. 130-133)  
 
 SOR 1.d – May 2011: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for damaging a 
government vehicle. On the day the incident occurred, Applicant would travel around in 
a vehicle and relieve other security officers who would then go to lunch or for a break. 
Applicant was backing the vehicle and hit a trash dumpster. The impact damaged the 
rear window of the vehicle. Applicant’s employer charged him between $250 and $300, 
and he paid for the damage to the rear window of the vehicle.  (GE 4; Tr. 133-138) 
 
 SOR 1.e – June 2012: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for not wearing 
his hat while on duty. Applicant was returning from his break. When he arrived at post 
(work location), he sat down and removed his hat to wipe off some perspiration. His 
supervisor happened to be in the area. Applicant signed the reprimand because he 
removed his hat. (GE 4; Tr. 138-140) 
 
 SOR 1.f – August 2012: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for having a 
personal cell phone with him while on duty at his post. Applicant forgot about his phone 
when he left the locker room. After he arrived at his post, regulations do not allow the 
 
  6 
 
officer to return to his locker unless there is another officer to relieve him. Applicant 
confirmed the supervisor’s question that he had a phone in pocket. Applicant signed the 
letter of reprimand. (GE 5; 140-142) 
 
 SOR 1.g – May 2013: Applicant received a one-day suspension for having a 
personal cell phone with him while on duty. The same circumstances resulting in the 
violation in August 2012 occurred in May 2013. Applicant forgot he had the phone in his 
pocket when he left the break room. (GE 6; Tr. 142- 147) 
 
 SOR 1.h – April 2014: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for leaving a 
company assigned radio in the restroom. Applicant explained that he put the radio 
behind him (probably on top of the toilet). To avoid being written up for returning late at 
this post, he put on his vest, but forgot to pick up the radio on his way out of the 
restroom. He immediately called the supervisor at the security control center who 
informed him they had the radio. When he went off duty, he went to the security control 
center and signed the reprimand for leaving the radio in the restroom. (GE 7; Tr. 148-
149) 
 
 SOR 1.i – December 2014: Applicant received a written reprimand for 
unreasonable delay in carrying out tasks and failing to report a potential security issue 
in a timely manner. The supervisor witnessed the first part of the violation. He provided 
a summary of the events, citing the regulation and Applicant’s violation by not 
contacting local law enforcement within a reasonable period. Somehow, added to the 
deputy manager’s original comment to cite Applicant for “loafing/unreasonable delays in 
carrying out tasks,” was “failing to report a potential security issue in a timely manner.” 
The “potential security issue” portion of the allegation the SOR allegation does not 
appear in any other location of the December 10, 2014 memorandum. Applicant 
believes he made the appropriate telephone call in three to five minutes rather than ten 
minutes as cited in the memorandum. (GE 8; Tr. 149-154) 
 
 SOR 1.j – October 2015: Applicant received a written notice of violating company 
policy by returning a government vehicle without first filling the gas tank. According to 
company policy, if the incoming security officer returns the vehicle with a half-filled gas 
tank, he must fill the tank. Applicant believed that when he returned the government 
vehicle to the job site, the gas tank was filled to more than half of its capacity. Applicant 
asked his supervisor to check the mileage on the odometer, but did not receive an 
answer. Applicant’s statement on the employer’s October 4, 2015 notice of infraction 
acknowledges the violation. (GE 9; Tr. 149-154) 
 
 SOR 1.k – March 2016: Applicant received a letter of reprimand for losing a 
company gas credit card that was in his possession. According to the summary of 
events, on February 24, 2016, Applicant reported that the company credit card was 
missing. Applicant recalled purchasing gas at the station. When he returned to the job 
site, he had the gas receipt, but could not find the credit card. He contacted his 
supervisor who told him to return to the station where he purchased the gas. He spoke 
to the gas station attendant, but could not find the card. After he and his supervisors 
 
  7 
 
searched the vehicle he had been using, they reported the card lost and he received the 
letter of reprimand. (GE 10; Tr. 157-159) 
 
 The government asked Applicant about the four late-to-work reprimands between 
April 2010 and February 2016 (SOR 1.l). The February 2016 late infraction occurred 
because he was late to work because of snow. Arriving late to work in January 2016 
occurred because he was involved in a vehicle accident while in transit from the 
shooting range. He could not recall the circumstances leading to the late-to-work written 
reprimands from April 2012 and April 2010. Applicant has never committed a security 
violation. (Tr. 176- 179) 
 
 Regarding the SOR 1.a allegation of a deliberate concealment of SOR 1.b 
through 1.i, and 1.l (to June 14, 2015, when Applicant certified the e-QIP), Applicant’s 
testimony was relatively clear. He became confused by Section 13A of the e-QIP asking 
whether he had ever received a written warning or official reprimand in the last seven 
years. When he asked his company supervisor about whether to disclose this 
information, the supervisor indicated that he did not have to disclose infractions more 
than 12 months old since they were removed from his disciplinary record. He thought all 
the infractions were removed, but forgot about the December 2014 violation.2  Applicant 
did not know that he could seek help from a facility security officer (FSO). Before his 
June 2015 e-QIP, Applicant could not access his personnel file though he never asked. 
But after receiving the disciplinary information in 2015 or 2016 from a government 
investigator, Applicant inserted a disciplinary history under Section 13A listing seven 
disciplinary incidents into his July 2016 Standard Form (SF) 86. The December 2014 
infraction (SOR 1.i) was not included however. Although Applicant recalled signing and 
dating the October 2016 SF 86, his copy posts a date, but has no signature. In 
November 2017, he requested a copy of the SF 86 showing the date he submitted the 
form. His employer informed Applicant that he was responsible for the requested 
information and recommended he retrieve the information from his e-QIP account. (AE 
L, M, N; Tr. 159-174) 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
                                            
2 Claiming that he forgot about the December 2014 incident because he was not 
allowed to review his personnel file is difficult to reconcile when incident occurred six 
months before he certified the June 2015 e-QIP. (Tr. 161) 
 
  8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14. the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ 33.1.15., an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of establishing that is clearly consistent 
with the national security interests of the United States to grant him a security 
clearance.       
 
Analysis 
 
PERSONAL CONDUCT 
 
15. The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is 
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during 
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility: (text deleted) 
 
16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
 
  9 
 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
 (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other                  
employer's time or resources. 
 
17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.  
 
Applicant omitted his disciplinary record from Section 13A of his June 2015 e-
QIP. Though he acknowledged the omission and the Government exhibits show that he 
omitted the information, he maintains that he did not do so intentionally. By denying the 
allegation, the burden remained with the Government to prove that Applicant had 
formed the intent when he submitted his e-QIP. An omission standing alone does not 
prove the element of intent to omit. Omissions can result from haste, oversight, 
forgetfulness, misinterpretation, or obtaining incorrect advice from a source who should 
be able to assist in filling out e-QIPS. The administrative judge must review the direct 
 
  10 
 
and circumstantial evidence to determine whether Applicant had the necessary intent to 
omit material and relevant information.   See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) Having carefully weighed the evidence, I conclude Applicant did not 
deliberately attempt to omit the required Section 13A disciplinary information from his 
June 2015 e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply.  
 
When Applicant confronted the disciplinary record segment of his e-QIP, he 
wisely contacted his supervisor for guidance on how to reply to the question. 
Unfortunately, instead of receiving the correct advice to disclose everything on the 
Government form, the supervisor told Applicant that he did not have to list any 
disciplinary infraction that was over one calendar year because those infractions were 
removed from his record. He relied on the supervisor’s advice to his detriment. 
Applicant did not know that an FSO was available to provide the correct guidance for 
this security issue.  During his interview with the Government investigator, Applicant 
learned that he had to disclose the disciplinary information. In his July 2016 e-QIP, he 
disclosed a large part of his disciplinary infractions. His disclosures in the July 2016 e-
QIP and at the hearing indicate he understands that full disclosure on Government 
security forms must be the standard and not the exception. In sum, Applicant’s 
explanation for the omitted information on his June 2015 e-QIP is credible. AG ¶ 17(a) 
has limited application because there is no evidence Applicant voluntarily disclosed the 
missing information to the government investigator. AG ¶ 17(b) is applicable because 
Applicant’s supervisor should have supplied accurate information to Applicant during the 
security investigation, or directed Applicant to the FSO. 
 
Applicant’s infractions of his company’s disciplinary workplace regulations from 
April 2010 to February 2016 constitute rule violations under AG 16(d)(3). When the list 
of offenses are lumped together, a pattern of rule infractions emerges. However, none 
of the infractions were determined to be security violations. The only infraction that uses 
the word “security” is SOR 1.i. However, there is no reference in the documentation 
supporting the infraction indicating that Applicant failed “to report a potential security 
issue” Viewing the offenses individually as well as together, Applicant did not repeat the 
misbehavior cited in SOR 1.b (May 2010), 1.c (January 2011), and 1.d (May 2011). He 
did not repeat the SOR 1.e (June 2012) infraction of not wearing his uniform. He drew a 
one-day suspension for violating the regulation of having his personal cell phone with 
him on two occasions (SOR 1.f, April 2012, 1.g, May 2013) within one year.  
 
In April 2014, he left his company radio in the restroom (SOR.1.h). In December 
2014, he was written up for loafing and “failing to report to report a potential security 
issue in a timely manner” (SOR 1.i). In October 2015, he returned the government 
vehicle without filling the gas tank. In March 2016, he lost a credit card. Except for the 
two violations of possessing his personal radio in 2012 and 2013, and the four late-to-
work infractions between 2010 and April 2016, there is no record of Applicant repeating 
the other offenses. While the most recent infraction occurred less than two years ago, 
the offenses were minor in nature and scope. Applicant receives limited mitigation under 
AG ¶ 17(c).  
 
 
  11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 In reaching my decision in this case, I have considered the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in the context of the whole-person concept. Applicant is a 61-year-
old man who has been married since 1981. He has five sons whose ages are 35, 33, 
32, 24, and 20. His daughter is 28 years old. He immigrated to the United States in 
2004 and became a naturalized citizen in 2009. He has a bachelor’s and master’s 
degree. He has owned his own home since 2012. He has been a security officer for a 
defense contractor since February 2010.   
 
 Wtness A and B, have observed Applicant as a coworker for five to seven years. 
They vouch for his honesty and trustworthiness. Witness C (pastor of the church) and 
Witness D (elder of the church) have interacted with Applicant on a regular basis in the 
day-to-day operation of their church. Witness C has known Applicant for 13 years and is 
impressed by Applicant’s positive impact on the church as an elder. Witness C extols 
Applicant’s honesty and trustworthiness. Witness D (elder of the church) has been 
friends with Applicant for 10 years, and has worked with him as an elder for the past five 
years. Based on their ten-year relationship, Witness D has found Applicant to be truthful 
and dedicated.  
 
 Witness E, Applicant’s 34-year-old son and his family live with Applicant. The son 
helps raise his younger siblings. Before he received his security clearance in 2013, 
Applicant helped Witness D with his security clearance application, emphasizing the 
importance of entering truthful and accurate information on the security form. By living in 
Applicant’s household, Witness D has learned the value of honesty, hard work, and 
taking responsibility. Witness F, Applicant’s wife for 36 years, characterized Applicant 
as an honest, responsible, and stable family man.  
 
 
  12 
 
  The favorable character testimony of Applicant’s honesty persuades me to 
conclude that Applicant did not deliberately omit information from the June 2015 e-QIP, 
even the December 2014 infraction that occurred only six months before he certified the 
e-QIP. Weighing all the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
context of the whole-person concept, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
raised by the personal conduct guideline.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
