KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  The Board does not
review a case de novo. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00214.a1
DATE: 02/27/2018
DATE: February 27, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00214
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
7, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 30, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant requested that his case be decided on the written record and then did not respond
to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Applicant’s appeal brief contains no
assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it contains new evidence in the form of
a detailed narrative statement by the Applicant describing the status of individual debts and  the
steps he has taken to address his financial problems, including the completion of credit counseling
and repair courses.  Attached to his statement are three credit reports that post-date the Judge’s
decision in his case.  
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
The Board does not review a case de novo. Its authority to review a case is limited to cases in which
the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has not made an
allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge is
AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
