 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02244 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On September 27, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On October 21, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 31, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On March 2, 2017, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for March 14, 2017. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did not call 
any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received into 
evidence without objection. On March 22, 2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). I held the record open until April 14, 2017, to afford Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE E through H, which were 
received into evidence without objection.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations.  After a thorough 
review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old technical data designer employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2015. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance. Applicant 
has successfully held a security clearance since 1995 when he was in the U.S. Air Force, 
discussed below. (Tr. 12-14; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1994. He has been attending on-line 
college courses since 2013 and estimates that he has about a year and a half left to 
complete his bachelor of science degree. (Tr. 14-16; GE 1)  He served in the Air Force 
from June 1994 to July 2014, and retired with 20 years of honorable service as a technical 
sergeant (pay grade E-6). His Air Force Subspecialty Code was 2A672 (aerospace 
ground equipment mechanic). (Tr. 16-18, GE 1) Applicant married in January 2007, and 
does not have any children. His wife is not employed outside the home. (Tr. 18-19, 37-
38; GE 1) 
 
 
                                            
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations   
 
Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling $22,595. These debts are 
substantiated through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. (SOR answer; GE 
1 (SF-86), GE 2 (October 6, 2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI)), and GE 3 and 4 (September 24, 2015 and October 21, 2016 credit 
reports)) (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e) 
 
Applicant traces his financial difficulties to a 2008 permanent change of station 
(PCS) move from stateside to overseas. He owed a home in his stateside location that 
he planned to rent out while he was stationed overseas. The home was financed with a 
VA loan and a private second mortgage. Applicant’s wife remained stateside. Shortly after 
Applicant arrived overseas, his wife sustained a severe head injury. His wife’s injury was 
so severe that it led to her being involuntarily committed to a mental health institution. 
Because of her ongoing medical condition, Applicant received a humanitarian 
reassignment stateside to a different state than where his home was located. (Tr. 19-21) 
Applicant stated that his wife has since recovered. (Tr. 25)  
 
Applicant attempted to maintain his home and in the process made “numerous 
trips back and forth to [home location] to – to get the property back in a rental condition.” 
(Tr. 21) As a result of his tenants not paying their rent and damaging his home, Applicant 
was unable to afford maintaining his home and “ended up having to let the property go 
into foreclosure” in 2013. (Tr. 21)  
 
The following describes the status of Applicant’s SOR debts: 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a – Charged-off credit card account for $5,290. Applicant 
contacted creditor and was advised that debt had been sold and original 
creditor was unable to tell him to whom debt had been sold. Applicant 
has been unable to locate or contact the creditor in interest and debt no 
longer appears on Applicant’s April 12, 2017 credit report. (SOR 
response; Tr. 25-26; GE 3; AE E, AE F) ATTEMPTING TO RESOLVE. 
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b - Consumer collection account for $205. Paid in full. Debt no 
longer appears on Applicant’s April 12, 2017 credit report. (SOR 
response; Tr. 24, 27-28, 33-34; AE A, AE B, AE E, AE F) DEBT 
RESOLVED. 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c - Consumer collection account for $354. Applicant’s April 12, 
2017 credit report stated “Legally paid in full for less than the full 
balance.” (SOR response; Tr. 24, 29-30; GE 3; AE E, AE F) DEBT 
RESOLVED. 
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d - Charged-off second mortgage $12,653. Applicant stated 
this debt was satisfied through funds received during foreclosure 
proceedings in 2013. Debt no longer appears on Applicant’s April 12, 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2017 credit report. (SOR response; Tr. 22-23, 30-32; AE C, AE E, AE F) 
DEBT RESOLVED. 
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e - Personal loan collection account for $4,093. Applicant 
stated this account was established with Bank B as a “stopgap” until his 
second mortgage was approved with Bank A (see SOR ¶ 1.d). This loan 
was to be “subsumed” by the second mortgage when Bank A and Bank 
B merged. After Bank A refused to remove this debt from Applicant’s 
credit report, he joined a class action suit against Bank A for “Fake 
Account” disclosures. (SOR response; Tr. 32) Applicant is continuing to 
work with credit reporting agencies to have this debt removed from his 
credit report. (AE E, AE F) ATTEMPTING TO RESOLVE. 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant contacted a credit repair agency to review his credit report 
and assist where possible. The credit repair agency advised him that based on a review 
of his credit report, they was nothing left for them to do. (AE E) Applicant’s post-hearing 
budget reflects total monthly income of $4,395 with a net remainder of $362. (AE H) 
Applicant is current on his mortgage, student loan, credit card debt, and all of his 
household debts. (Tr. 34-37, 38-39) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The record establishes these disqualifying conditions, 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 lists five mitigating conditions potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the 
debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant merits credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his wife’s injury and resulting 
long-term treatment coupled with the unanticipated downfall of the housing market. He 
attempted to work with his creditors and took reasonable steps to resolve his debts.2 AG 
¶ 20(c) is partially applicable even though Applicant did not seek formal financial 
counseling. He has, however, produced evidence that reflects he is living within his 
means and has regained financial responsibility. There are clear indications that his 
financial problems are resolved or are being resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient 
information to establish partial if not full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).3 Applicant worked 
with his lender to resolve his second mortgage. Applicant’s first and second mortgages 
were satisfied as a result of the 2013 foreclosure proceedings. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable 
to SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
                                            
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 
1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he maintained 
contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts current. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old technical data designer employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2015. Before becoming a defense contractor employee, he served 
20 years of honorable service in the Air Force. He has successfully held a security 
clearance for 23 years. Maintaining his security clearance will allow him to enhance his 
position within his company and continue serving as a defense contractor.  
 
Applicant had a series of personal mishaps that began with his wife’s severe head 
injury shortly after he arrived overseas. Once Applicant returned stateside on his 
humanitarian transfer, he attempted to rent his home, located in a different state than his 
reassignment location. He not only incurred costly trips visiting his rental home, but also 
had the misfortune of having tenants who did not pay their rent on time and damaged his 
property. Unable to sustain these losses and costs on an E-6’s salary, he was forced to 
let him home go into foreclosure. Applicant is current on his bills and is in the process of 
regaining financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the new 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude that 
financial consideration security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
