1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 16-03785 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern generated by his 
delinquent student loan. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable to find it 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant security clearance eligibility for him. 
The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 9, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting subparagraph 1.a and 
denying the remainder. He requested a decision based on the written record instead of a 
hearing. On March 22, 2017, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
 
2 
 
(FORM). Applicant received a copy of the FORM on March 29, 2017, and he filed a 
response on April 24, 2017. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017. 
 
 On November 8, 2017, I re-opened the record, extending it through close of 
business December 8, 2017, to allow the parties to submit additional evidence. Within the 
time allotted, Department Counsel submitted a credit report, dated November 8, 2017, 
which I have incorporated into the record as Item 6. Applicant did not submit any additional 
evidence.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. My decision would not have been different if I had applied the previous 
iteration of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 61-year-old man with three adult children. He is a high school 
graduate who has been working for a federal contractor since 1986.  He has held a security 
clearance since 1993. (Item 2 at 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts. Two of the debts (subparagraphs 1.c and 
1.d), allegedly medical bills, are collectively less than $130. Applicant does not recognize 
either creditor. He wrote the collection agent for both debts requesting copies of the original 
bills, but never received a reply. (Item 2 at 1) Consequently, he denies these allegations. 
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.b is a medical bill totaling $257. Applicant paid 
this bill. (Item 1 at 2) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a, totaling $21,144 is a student loan that Applicant cosigned for his 
daughter approximately 12 years ago, when she began college. She defaulted on the loan 
payment shortly after finishing college. Applicant will not pay this debt because his 
daughter incurred it. As of April 2017, Applicant’s daughter was working with the creditor to 
develop a payment arrangement. (Response at 3)  
 
 Applicant has $12,000 of nondelinquent debt, including his remaining mortgage, car 
payments, and credit cards. (Item 2 at 1) His assets exceed his debt. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
3 
 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant satisfied subparagraph 1.b. Although he did not provide evidence 
substantiating his dispute of subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d, I accept his explanation, given the 
minimal amount of the contested debts. I resolve subparagraphs 1.b through 1.d in his 
favor. 
 
 Applicant’s refusal to pay subparagraph 1.a, his daughter’s student loan that he 
cosigned, triggers the application of AG ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of 
the ability to do so.” Although Applicant did not incur the debt, he had a responsibility, as 
the loan cosigner, to pay it if his daughter, the loan’s principal debtor, defaulted. 
Conversely, the loan has been outstanding for more than 12 years. His daughter has 
4 
 
finished college and is negotiating with the creditor to develop a payment plan. Applicant 
has minimal debt and the record evidence reflects no financial instability. Under these 
circumstances, I conclude AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1 Any negative security significance of Applicant’s failure to 
pay his daughter’s student loan after she defaulted is outweighed by the age of the debt 
and his daughter’s recent efforts at taking responsibility for the debt. Under these 
circumstances, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concern. In reaching this 
decision, I considered the length of time that Applicant has held a security concern without 
incident.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
