 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00461 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
Noncommissioned  
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
recent financial problems and that he was responsible under the circumstances. His 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control. Financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
June 30, 2014. He was interviewed by a government investigator on December 14, 
2015. After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 24, 
2016, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on July 14, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on May 10, 2017, scheduling a hearing for May 22, 2017. At the hearing, the 
Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified and submitted 
 
2 
 
 
exhibit (AE) 1, post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted as evidence without objection, 
except for GE 5. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 31, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d through 1.h), 
except for ¶ 1.c, which he denied. His admissions to the SOR allegations and at his 
hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school and attended college where he earned a bachelor’s degree in 1992. He 
married in 1998, and has no children. His wife works as a musician and substitute 
teacher. She make about $17,000 - $20,000 yearly, and helps Applicant pay their debts 
and living expenses. 
 
Applicant has been employed by different companies since 2007. His current 
employer, a federal contractor, hired him for a full-time position in October 2011. He has 
been working for the same employer and clearance sponsor since. Applicant also 
worked part time as a courier between 2009 and 2013. Applicant testified that he held a 
secret clearance between 1996 and 2002. He also held a public trust position while 
working for another government agency in 2011.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he had financial problems related to an investment (rental) property, 
expenses associated with repairs to the rental property and his home, and a lien 
imposed for a renter’s unpaid utility bill. Applicant explained that he purchased a 
“Section 8” (Government subsidized) rental property in 2005. In October 2006, the 
renter left without notice, owing two month’s rent, and leaving the property with 
extensive damage. Applicant repaired the property and kept paying the mortgage, but 
did not get a qualified tenant until the summer of 2008. He rented the property for less 
than the mortgage payment and had to make up the difference from his own pocket to 
pay the mortgage.   
 
Applicant explained that maintenance and property repairs for the rental property 
and his home adversely affected his ability to pay the rental property mortgage and his 
home mortgage. He did not have the financial means to continue paying both 
mortgages, other debts, and his living expenses. Concerned about being financially 
overextended, Applicant contracted a company to help him do a short sale of the rental 
property. He claimed the company advised him not to make any more mortgage 
payment or to perform additional repairs on the property. The short sale did not go 
through. Applicant defaulted on the mortgage loan and the first mortgage holder 
foreclosed on the mortgage. (SOR ¶ 1.b) The property was sold in auction. Applicant 
believes the proceeds of the sale released him of further financial liability towards the 
first mortgage holder. The February 2014 credit report in evidence shows a “0” balance 
on the account after the foreclosure. (GE 4) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant owes over $68,000 to the holder of the second mortgage for the rental 
property. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The credit report shows that the account was charged off in 2014. 
Applicant tried to get in contact with the creditor, but his inquiries were not answered. 
He has never been contacted by the second mortgage holder concerning the debt. 
 
Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant’s documentary evidence 
established the account was fraudulent and the creditor released him of responsibility. 
(Tr. 29-30) Applicant paid the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in December 2015. 
(Answer to the SOR) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.h alleged traffic tickets. Applicant initially disputed the 
tickets and lost the appeal. He refused to pay them because he considered he was right 
and the tickets were unfair. At the hearing, Applicant realized the adverse possible 
consequences of his failure to pay his legal obligations and paid them. (AE 1) 
 
Applicant’s 2016 credit report shows a total of 24 trade lines (accounts): 21 
accounts were noted as “R1” or “M1” (in good standing), and only the three accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c were noted as delinquent, charged off, or 
foreclosed. There are no other delinquent or collection accounts. He has not incurred 
any new delinquent debt. (GE 4) 
 
Applicant’s yearly income is about $120,000. With his wife’s earnings ($17,000 - 
$20,000) they live comfortably and have no financial problems. His financial situation is 
stable and he pays all of his current bills on time. He recognizes that his past financial 
problems resulted from listening to bad advice about buying the rental property, and 
making a bad business decision by purchasing the rental property. His financial 
situation was aggravated with the downturn of the real estate market between 2008 and 
2012.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
 
4 
 
 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
 
5 
 
 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He 
defaulted on a mortgage loan and it was foreclosed. The sale of the property released 
him of liability for the first mortgage. He still could be held financially responsible for 
over $68,000 owed to the second mortgage holder. He also accumulated four parking 
tickets that he paid. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; 
and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the 
disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were, in part, caused by listening to and following 
bad advice about a real estate investment. His financial problems could also be 
attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his control – the downturn 
of the real estate market between 2008 and 2012.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant resolved all of the accounts alleged in the SOR, except for the alleged 
$68,000 debt to the second mortgage holder. Thus, his financial problems are ongoing. 
He presented evidence of some efforts to resolve his unpaid mortgages by contracting a 
company to conduct the short sale of the property. He also acted responsibly under the 
circumstances by paying those debts he could afford to pay. Thus, he demonstrated 
financial responsibility.  
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable and he is paying his bills on time. 
There is no evidence that he has financial problems. To the contrary, his credit report 
shows financial responsibility – there is no evidence of additional delinquent accounts or 
that he is living beyond his financial means. I find that his financial problems are 
resolved and under control. Considering the evidence as a whole, his inability to resolve 
the second mortgage debt does not reflect adversely on his ability and willingness to 
follow rules and regulations for safeguarding classified information. 
 
 Moreover, Applicant has learned from the clearance process. He is fully aware 
that he is required to demonstrate financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. 
His financial problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 2011. He has held a clearance and positions of trust without 
any issues or concerns. Circumstances beyond his control contributed to or aggravated 
his recent financial problems. The record evidence is sufficient to establish that his 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. The AG do not require an 
Applicant to immediately resolve or pay each and every debt alleged in the SOR, to be 
debt free, or to resolve first the debts alleged in the SOR. An Applicant needs only to 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant demonstrated a track record of 
paying his financial obligations. The financial issues concerning the former investment 
property were an isolated, aberrational event that is unlikely to recur. Applicant is aware 
that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. The 
financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
