 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02688 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 19, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 
20, 2017, and the hearing was scheduled for January 17, 2018. Due to unforeseen 
circumstances regarding the federal budget, the hearing was moved and held with the 
consent of Applicant on January 16, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4. Applicant objected to GE 3 and 4, credit reports, as hearsay. His objection was 
overruled and all GE were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. There were no objections, and they were admitted into 
evidence. Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is a demonstrative exhibit. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on January 23, 2018. The record was held open until January 30, 2018, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted AE C and D, and they were 
admitted without objection.2 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing the Guideline E, 
personal conduct, allegation in ¶ 2.a. Applicant had no objection and the motion was 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1 through 1.n, and 1.p. He denied 
the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.o, and did not admit or deny the allegation in ¶ 1.q, which will 
be considered denied. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2014. He served in 
the military from 1984 to 1990 and was honorably discharged. He married in 1984 and 
divorced in 2009. He has three adult children from the marriage. He remarried in 2009 
and has no children from that marriage. Applicant has no periods of unemployment.3  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his 2009 divorce. He separated from 
his wife in 2006. They owned a house at the time. He lived in an apartment and was 
paying both the mortgage on the house and his rent. He used credit cards to help make 
his rent payments. In 2007, a hurricane caused damage to the roof of the house. Applicant 
obtained a second mortgage to pay for the repairs. In 2008, the house was sold by a short 
sale. Applicant was unable to pay his credit cards as he did not receive sufficient funds 
from the sale. Applicant testified that, “You’re not supposed to lose money on real estate 
investments. I lost substantially and blame the banks.”4  
 
                                                          
2 HE II is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
3 Tr. 19-21. 
 
4 Tr.23-29. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant attributed his federal tax debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, due to the sale of 
the house and receipt of proceeds, which was considered as income and was taxed. He 
testified he learned of the tax debt in 2010 and made $84 payments from 2010 to 2016, 
and the tax debt is resolved. Applicant did not provide corroboration the debt is resolved.5   
 
 Regarding the state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q, Applicant explained he was 
living in one state and working in another state. His employer only withheld state income 
taxes for one state. Applicant knew that state taxes were not being withheld for the other 
state, but he did not save money so he could pay the state taxes when due. This occurred 
in 2009 and again in 2012. Applicant stated he did not have the self-discipline to save 
money to pay the tax debt when due. He stated he arranged a payment plan, but had 
difficulty maintaining the payments. He stopped making payments in January 2017 
because he did not have the money. He began a new payment plan in December 2017 
and agreed to pay $189 a month for 40 months. He said this covers state taxes for 2011, 
2012, and 2013. He stated that he paid his 2014 and 2015 state taxes. He does not know 
how much he owes in delinquent state taxes.6 Post-hearing, Applicant provided a state 
tax form showing he received a refund in 2017 for his 2012 state taxes. The form does 
not detail when his 2012 state taxes were paid.7 His state income tax debt is resolved. 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions and 
credit reports, dated June 2014 and May 2016.8 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($9,461) and 
1.c ($4,887) are credit card accounts that Applicant used to pay his rent. Both have been 
charged off. Applicant had no explanation for his failure to pay them, other than he lost 
money on the sale of his house. They are unresolved.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,486) is a car loan that Applicant cosigned with his 
daughter. The car was voluntarily repossessed. Applicant stated “there’s is no reason I 
haven’t paid it. I just don’t - - I hadn’t thought about it.”10 The debt remains unresolved. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($311), 1.e ($242), 1.f 
($367), 1.g ($1,137), 1.i ($641), 1.j ($610), 1.k ($494) and 1.n ($102) are consumer debts. 
He stated his wife is calling the creditors and trying to resolve the debts. He stated he has 
been working with one of the creditors on a payment plan, but it is still in the planning 
stages. He acknowledged he has had the SOR since November 2016 and has not taken 
                                                          
5 Tr. 29-33, 52-53. 
 
6 Tr. 34-41, 53. 
 
7 I have not considered delinquent tax debts not alleged or any other derogatory information not alleged 
except when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-
person analysis. 
 
8 GE 3, 4.  
 
9 Tr. 27-29. 
 
10 Tr. 45-46. 
 
 
4 
 
 
action to resolve the delinquent debts that are alleged.11 None of these debts are 
resolved.  
 
Applicant testified that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($494) is paid, and he would provide 
proof. He did not. The debt is unresolved.12 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($685), 1.l ($491) and 1.m ($175) are medical expenses 
incurred between 2010 and 2015. Applicant believes his insurance company should have 
paid these debts because he pays his copays, but he has not contacted the insurance 
company to dispute the debts or resolve them.13 They remain unresolved.  
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.o ($1,870) was filed in 2010. Applicant testified he was 
unaware of the judgment until 2014. He provided a document with his answer to show he 
settled the judgment in 2015. He is having difficulty getting the judgment released from 
his record. The debt was incurred when Applicant broke his lease.14  
  
 Applicant testified that his wife owes federal income taxes due from before they 
were married. The IRS is withholding refunds owed to Applicant to pay his wife’s federal 
income tax debt.15  
 
 In 2010, Applicant considered filing bankruptcy and sought advice from an 
attorney. He was told he earned too much, and he could not afford to make payments 
over five years. He has not received any financial counseling. Applicant’s annual income 
is approximately $96,000. He does not have a budget and has no idea where he spends 
his money. He intends to work his way out of debt.16  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in October 2015. During 
the interview many of the delinquent debts in the SOR were addressed. He told the 
investigator that his ex-wife was supposed to pay many of the delinquent debts in 
accordance with their divorce decree. Applicant did not provide evidence to corroborate 
this statement.17 
 
 Applicant’s wife provided a letter in the answer to the SOR. She took responsibility 
for using credit cards and admitted having a compulsive personality. Applicant was aware 
                                                          
11 Tr. 47-50. 
 
12 Tr. 50-51. 
 
13 Tr. 51-52. 
 
14 Tr. 42-45. 
 
15 Tr. 56-57. 
 
16 Tr. 57-63. 
 
17 GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
of her actions regarding the credit cards and her disorder. Applicant paid for two inpatient 
treatment programs for her.18  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his military discharge papers and a performance 
evaluation, which rates him in many categories as “above target” or “target.”19  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
18 Answer to SOR. 
 
19 AE A, B.  
 
6 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income taxes as 
required.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts he began accumulating several years 
ago that are unresolved. He failed to timely pay his 2009 federal income taxes and his 
2009 and 2012 state income taxes. There is sufficient evidence to support the application 
of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 Applicant provided proof that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o is resolved. He did not provide 
evidence that the remaining debts are resolved or being resolved. His financial problems 
are ongoing, and there is insufficient evidence to conclude future financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his 2009 divorce, and his failure to 
make a profit when he sold the martial home. Applicant’s divorce was beyond his control. 
The fact he lost money when he sold the marital home was beyond his control. In his 
wife’s letter, she attributed some of their financial problems to her compulsive spending. 
According to his wife, Applicant was aware that she was using credit cards and of her 
compulsive habits. His failure to address this problem that adversely affected his finances 
was within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant was aware that he owed states taxes, but 
admitted he did not have the self-discipline to pay them timely. Applicant provided some 
evidence his state income tax debt are now resolved. He stated he resolved the federal 
tax debt, but did not provide proof despite the record remaining open for submission of 
proof. He did not provide evidence that any of the remaining debts are being resolved. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence for the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) that 
he acted responsibly in resolving his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has received or is receiving financial 
counseling for his financial problems and there are clear indications his problems are 
being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o. He provided documentation to show his 
state income tax debt is resolved (SOR ¶ 1.q). AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has initiated or is adhering to a good-faith 
effort to repay the remaining overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts, 
including his federal income tax debt. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to the remaining 
allegations in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant stated he resolved his delinquent 2009 federal tax debt as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.p, but did not provide supporting evidence. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply to his 
federal tax debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He owes approximately $33,380 for 15 delinquent 
accounts, including federal income taxes. Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator in October 2015 and was put on notice his debts were a security concern. 
Applicant receive the SOR in November 2016, again highlighting that his debts raised 
security concerns. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to conclude his finances are 
under control, and he has established a reliable financial track record. The record 
 
9 
 
 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.o:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.p:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.q:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  WITHDRAWN 
  
 Subparagraph 2.a:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
