                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
       -------------------------------------                   )       ISCR  Case No.  16-01037          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DoD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 10, 2017, and he requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on June 21, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on
August 2, 2017. The Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit. (AE A) The transcript was received on
August 14, 2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a child support order, an
earnings statement, documented consumer debts and explanations. For good cause
shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. Department Counsel
was afforded seven days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, applicant supplemented the record with a copy of a child
support order of November 2016 from another state and two character references.
Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as AEs B-D. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) incurred a federal tax lien in May 2014
in the amount of $528; (b) incurred a child support arrearage of $7,820; and (c)
accumulated four delinquent consumer debts exceeding $2,000. Allegedly, these debts
remain outstanding.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the debts and denied two
others. Specifically, he denied having an outstanding federal tax lien, and he denied
having a charged-off auto loan. He admitted having child support arrearage and three
delinquent consumer debts. He provided no explanations or affirmative claims.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old structural mechanic for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
2
Background
          Applicant married in November 2006 and divorced in February 2009. He has one
child (age nine) from this marriage. (GE 1-2; Tr. 30-31, 41, and 47) He remarried in June
2014 and has one child from this marriage. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 41-42) He attended post-high
school education classes between December 2006 and April 2007 but received no
degree or diploma. Between August 2011 and November 2013 he attended classes at a
local community college, but earned no degree or diploma. (GEs 1-2) Applicant enlisted in
the Marine Corps in January 2006 and served five years of active duty. (GE 1) He
received an honorable discharge in January 2011. (GE 1) Applicant has resided in his
current state of residence since December 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 43) 
Applicant has worked for his current contractor since June 2015. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 53-
54)  Between March 2015 and June 2015, he worked for a regional medical center as an
EKG technician. He reported periods of unemployment between December 2014 and
March 2015 and between January 2011 and March 2013. (GEs 1-2)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2009 and 2016, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts. He
attributed his delinquencies to extended unemployment in the aftermath of his military
discharge in 2011. (Tr. 25, 48) His delinquent debts included owed federal taxes for tax
year 2014 in the amount of $528. (GEs 1-2) Applicant documented paying this tax debt in
March 2016. (AE A; Tr. 44-45) 
Additionally, Applicant accumulated a child support arrearage following his divorce
from his first wife in 2009 and ensuing military discharge in 2011. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 50)
Between 2009 and his discharge in 2011, he made regular $225 monthly child support
payments through automatic pay withdrawals. (Tr. 50-51) His child support withholding
payments ceased, however, after his military discharge. For his ensuing two plus years of
unemployment, he was unable to make any child support payments. Beginning in March
2013, his new employer resumed Applicant’s automatic  pay withdrawals of $225 a month
to satisfy Applicant’s child support obligations. (Tr. 53-54) 
Between March 2015 and November 2016, he made no voluntary or involuntary
child support payments. (Tr. 54-55), and his arrearage increased considerably. He
reported child support arrearage of $7,820 in his electronic questionnaires for
investigations processing (e-QIP) of September 2015. (GE 1) By November 2016, his
child support arrearage had increased to more than $35,000. Judgment was entered
against him in November 2016 by a court in his ex-wife’s home state in the amount of
$35,175. (AE B) This net judgment amount was arrived at after crediting Applicant with
arrearage applied by other states withholding orders. (Tr. 61-66)  Under the terms of the
state court’s final order, Applicant was directed to pay his ex-wife the sum of $3,000
within 90 days and remit any tax refund he might receive in the future to his ex-wife until
the arrearage is paid in full. (AE B) And, he was obligated to make monthly payments of
3
$590 in child support to his ex-wife in accordance with the terms of an income withholding
order to be issued. (AE B)  
Applicant assured he paid the $3,000 directed by the state court in his case and
committed to implementing $590 pay withdrawals from his employer in compliance with
the state court’s directions and has reduced the balance owing to around $32,000. (Tr.
27, 61)  Afforded an opportunity to supplement the record with a payment history of his
state court ordered monthly arrearage payments since the issuance of the court’s
November 2016 final order, Applicant did not provide any historical accounting of post-
November 2016 arrearage payments. Whether and to what extent Applicant has complied
with the terms of the state court’s November 2016 final order is unclear at this point.
Besides incurring delinquent taxes and the child support arrearage, Applicant
accumulated four delinquent debts. These debts are covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.c (a charged
off auto loan for $2,296); 1.d (a consumer debt placed in collection for $688); 1.e (a
medical account placed in collection for $156); and 1.f (a consumer account placed in
collection for $134). 
While Applicant believes he has paid off all of the listed medical and consumer
debts listed in the SOR, he has not to date provided any documentation of his addressing
any of these SOR-listed debts. Without documentation to corroborate his beliefs, they
cannot be treated as resolved debts. Based on his credit reports in evidence, these debts
remain unresolved. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 32-36)
Applicant provided no evidence of budgeting or financial counseling. He did
engage a credit repair firm in 2015 to help him “clean up his credit” and keep him up to
date on what he needs to take care of. (GEs 1-2) He credited this firm with helping him to
remove certain unidentified accounts from his credit reports. (GE 1)
Applicant grosses $43,000 annually; while his wife grosses $40,000 a year. (Tr.
76-77) He maintains approximately $5,000 in a 401(k) retirement account but has no
veterans disability benefits. (Tr. 79) He has no monthly discretionary funds to address
other expenditures. (Tr. 81-85) In 2016, he financed a home with a VA mortgage of
$168,000 and no money down. Monthly payments on his mortgage are $1,200. (Tr. 83) 
Currently, he is up to date with his mortgage and car payments and other debts. (Tr. 81-
85)
Character references
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisors and coworkers. (AEs C-D) Both
supervisors describe Applicant as an excellent aircraft mechanic. (AEs C-D) They
consider him to be one of their best employees who does everything asked of him. They
credited him with an excellent work ethic while under their respective supervision who
does not hesitate to go above and beyond his duties. (AEs C-D) 
4
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, ¶
2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
5
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds . . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulating delinquent federal
taxes, child support arrearage, and several medical and consumer debts. All but his
federal tax debt for tax year 2014 remain delinquent and outstanding. Recently, his child
support arrearage was reduced to judgment for more than $35,000 with payment terms
set by the court. Applicant’s continuing debt delinquencies warrant the application of
three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to
satisfy debts;” 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and 19(f), “failure to
6
file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to
pay annual Federal, state, local income tax as required.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his listed delinquent child support
arrearage, medical, consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof. See
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006). Applicant’s delinquent debts are fully
documented in his credit reports and create some initial judgment issues. See ISCR
Case No. 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Extenuating circumstances (i.e., extended unemployment and the lack of
sufficient income to cover his arrearage on his child support obligations for his nine
year-old child) have accounted for most of Applicant’s financial problems over the
course of the past seven years since his military discharge in 2011. MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” partially applies to Applicant’s situation.
Since accepting the state court’s child support arrearage payment terms in
November 2016, Applicant claims to be making progress in fulfilling the court’s
directions for paying the determined arrearage. Afforded an opportunity to provide
corroborating evidence of his making the payments called for in the court’s final order,
he has not done so. The arrearage is substantial and requires documented proof of his
compliance efforts to satisfy his evidentiary burden in these proceedings. 
Without documented proof of Applicant’s complying with the state court’s terms,
mitigating benefits covered by the acting responsibly prong of MC ¶ 20(b) cannot be
met. See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). For the same reasons, the acting
responsibly prong of MC ¶ 20(b) is not available to him with regard to his listed medical
and consumer debts. 
Absent documentation of Applicant’s compliance with the state court’s order
covering his child support arrearage and making payments on the medical and
consumer debts covered by SOR ¶ 1.c-1.f, or providing documentary evidence of
reasonable disputes of any of these debts, he may not  avail himself of the mitigation
benefits of either MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” or MC ¶ 20(e), “the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
7
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
While some financial counseling credit is warranted to cover Applicant’s use of a
credit repair firm in 2015, availability of MC ¶ 20(c), “the individual has received or is
receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source,
such as a non-profit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control,” to Applicant is quite limited. Aside from his using a
credit repair service to eliminate debts from his credit reports, he provided no probative
evidence to show he received beneficial counseling advice on how to better manage his
finances in the future.  Payment follow-up on his child support arrearage and other listed
delinquent debts in the SOR is missing and cannot be reconciled with principles of good
financial counseling advice on how to improve account management.
Applicant provided documentary proof of his paying the federal taxes owed for
tax year 2014 in March 2016, well before the issuance of the SOR. (AE A) This listed
SOR debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.a is mitigated and resolved in Applicant’s favor.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) .
In Applicant’s case, he has a very limited track record in addressing his lengthy history
of child support arrearage since he ceased making payments to his ex-wife in March
2015. Still uncertain is whether he has made his child support payment in compliance
with the state court’s November 2016 final order.
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is a mixed one for Applicant. While he is well-
regarded for his trustworthiness, reliability, and work ethic by his supervisors, he has
shown little documented progress to date in addressing his child support arrearage and
medical and consumer debts. 
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his finances reflect limited
attention to his debts and insufficient financial responsibility and good judgment to credit
him with restoring his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified
information. See AG ¶ 18. These security concerns leave unresolved doubts about  his
ability to prudently manage his finances in the future. 
Conclusions are warranted that Applicant’s finances are insufficiently stabilized at
this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.b-1.f of the SOR. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
subparagraph 1.a of the SOR based on Applicant’s documented satisfaction of  the
2014 federal tax debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.a. Eligibility to hold a security clearance
under the facts and circumstances of Applicant’s case is inconsistent with the national
interest.
8
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
 GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
              Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f                 Against Applicant
   Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
10
  
11
