 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-02056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire 
                                        For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR 
allegations on January 12, 2017, and also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the 
case on May 24, 2017. That same day, DOHA issued a notice of hearing setting the 
hearing for July 26, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-3, as well as two hearing exhibits that were accepted without objection as HE 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG were amended. The 
amended AG are now in effect for adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. This includes the decision here. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
1-2.2 Applicant offered testimony, two character witnesses, and 16 documents, which 
were accepted without objection as Exs. A-P. The record was kept open through August 
11, 2017, to allow the parties to supplement the record. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on August 3, 2017. On August 11, 2017, Applicant submitted one additional 
document, accepted without objection as Ex. Q, and the record was closed. Based on 
my review of the documentary evidence, testimony, and the Applicant’s demeanor, I find 
that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline H, but failed to mitigate 
Guideline E security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old assistant engineer who has worked for the same entity 
since 2016. That business is a drug-free work place. Applicant was first granted a 
security clearance in 2005 while working for another employer.3 Applicant has earned 
both a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He is single and has no children.  
 
 In July 2012, Applicant was at a gathering at a friend’s home, in anticipation of a 
tailgate party and a rock concert. As the guests drank alcoholic beverages, somebody 
offered Applicant a chocolate chip cookie from a kitchen container. Encouraged to try 
what seemed to be a popular treat, he ate one despite his suspicions regarding its 
popularity with the pre-concert crowd. About 90 minutes later, Applicant began to feel 
lightheaded and nauseous. Feeling unwell, he distanced himself from the crowd and 
slept. He then confirmed that the cookie had been laced with a drug, marijuana. much to 
the amusement of some of those who knew what he had done.4 Applicant was 
understandably upset. He had never before used marijuana, an illegal drug. He has no 
desire to use it in the future.  
 
 Sometime around June of 2014, Applicant had surgery.5 He was prescribed 
oxycodeine for pain relief, which he never used. In July 2014 he went on a brief 
                                                          
2 What has been marked and accepted as Ex. 3 was initially proffered as a potential Ex. 4. After objection 
by Applicant, the Government withdrew its proffer of that document, and the remaining documents were  
renumbered accordingly.  
 
3 Applicant has worked for at least one other entity since being employed by his original security 
clearance sponsor. He was aware illegal drug use is incompatible with the obligations of one maintaining 
a security clearance. 
  
4 Applicant sensed that there was something special about the cookie, but he did not know it had 
marijuana in it. (Tr. 29, 40) After a few beers, and with a weakness for cookies, he readily accepted the 
cookie. (Tr. 41) In his 2015 SCA, Applicant did not note that he was unaware that the ingested cookie 
was laced with marijuana; rather, he wrote that he did not “intend to do it [use marijuana] again.” (Ex. 1, at 
27 of 34) 
 
5 A 2016 interview referencing a polygraph test administered to Applicant in September 2014 indicated 
Applicant had surgery in 2011 and that he let his friend have oxycodone, discussed below, in 2012. 
Applicant’s explanation and the balance of the documentation, however, indicate the years set forth in 
these findings as being the correct years, and that the inconsistent interview notes are erroneous. (Tr. 53-
61, 67-68)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
excursion with some pals. Once there, he found the oxycodone bottle in his duffle. 
When an old friend who suffers from chronic back pain learned that Applicant had 
oxycodone6 in his possession, he pestered Applicant into giving him some of the drug 
for a back pain flare up. The friend told Applicant he used the same prescription 
medication for his back issues. Applicant knew the friend had back pain issues and had 
used the drug. Applicant ultimately let his friend have two pills for pain. Later, however, 
he saw the friend take a pill with a beer.  
 
At the time, Applicant did not know it was illegal to let another person use some 
on your own medication when that other individual had a prescription for the same drug. 
(Tr. 52) Applicant does not recall if the friend immediately swallowed or chewed the 
pills. (Tr. 31) He is not certain if the friend used them for pain or a “high.” 
 
 In June 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to a question inquiring whether he had illegally used any controlled 
substances, to include marijuana, in the preceding seven years, Applicant answered 
“No.” He also answered “No” to a question inquiring whether he had ever used an illegal 
substance while possessing a security clearance. He did not mention the cookie 
incident in response to either question. Later, during a September 2014 polygraph test, 
Applicant reluctantly conceded, and corrected, his omission regarding the marijuana 
cookie. This occurred after one of his answers triggered a questionable result on the 
test. Applicant was evasive in these instances because he feared the two drug-related 
incidents would make him “look really bad” and possibly jeopardize his professional 
aspirations. (Tr. 48-49) 
 
 At the time the two drug-related instances at issue occurred, Applicant was 
unsure whether the security clearance granted to him in 2005 while working for a 
different entity was still in force. He has no intention of knowingly using marijuana in the 
future. He has not had contact with the individuals involved in these incidents for two 
years. He has never intentionally sought out drugs or drug-related venues.  
 
Applicant has thrice passed drug tests in the seven months preceding the 
hearing. (Ex. G) He has never failed a drug test in the past. On his own volition, he 
sought a substance abuse assessment. He was found not to be at risk for substance 
abuse. (Tr. 28; Ex. H) He has never been clinically diagnosed as a substance abuser. 
He submitted a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility. (Tr. 63; SOR Response) He has submitted 
positive recommendations, and witnesses describe him as conservative, trustworthy, 
and an excellent worker. (Tr. 13-24) 
 
 
                                                          
6 At various points in the record and in the transcript, the drug at issue is referred to as oxycodone, a 
generic medication, and OxyContin. The two are related, with OxyContin being a brand name, extended-
release, version of oxycodone. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
 
 
 
 
5 
trustworthiness. This is because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological 
impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Such use also raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant admitted he used marijuana on one occasion in July 2012 and 
provided a friend with oxycodeine, an opioid previously prescribed to Applicant, in July 
2014. Both incidents occurred while he maintained a security clearance. Such facts 
have the potential to raise AG ¶ 25. 
 
(a) any substance misuse, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence raises security concerns under Guideline 
H. Therefore, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate related security concerns. Under Guideline H, conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns arising from drug involvement and substance misuse 
are enumerated. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse 
is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Applicant’s only use of marijuana was in 2012, almost six years ago. He 
permitted his friend to use two of his oxycodone tablets for back pain in 2014, about four 
years ago. These are not insignificant periods of time in the life of a now 37-year-old 
Applicant. He was correct in noting that the incidents regarding marijuana and the 
oxycodone could make him look bad. Taken together, however, these two isolated and 
distinctly different incidents are seemingly unrelated and do not represent a clear 
behavioral pattern, except to the extent that some kind of drug was involved both times.  
 
These circumstances, however, are relatively unique. Applicant had no history of 
drug abuse before 2012. Regardless of whether he knew or suspected the cookie he 
ingested contained marijuana before eating the treat, his adverse reaction to the drug, 
 
 
 
 
6 
and his visible remorse concerning the matter, persuasively indicate he will stay clear of 
the drug in the future. As for the incident regarding oxycodone, it seems to have been 
the result of naïveté.  
 
While Applicant did not know it was illegal to share prescription drugs, he did 
know his friend had legitimate back pain. While the drug could also be used to provide a 
“high,” there is no evidence that was the friend’s intent. More importantly, it is clear 
Applicant had no inclination to personally use the medication for any purpose. Applicant 
is now on notice that sharing controlled substances such as opioids is illegal, even 
amongst family and friends. Therefore, I find it highly unlikely he will again jeopardize 
his career and share prescriptions. 
 
Today, Applicant is savvy about the significance of his two drug-related incidents, 
and of the security concerns they pose. He understands another incident could trigger 
the revocation of any security clearance granted. He acknowledges his drug 
involvement and substance misuse. He now understands the law as it pertains to 
prescription drugs. He has not again used marijuana or shared a prescribed drug in 
multiple years.  
 
Applicant credibly articulated his intent to not be illegally involved with drugs in 
the future. He has not had contact with any of the individuals involved in these two 
incidents. He does not seek out venues where drugs are used. He provided a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse, 
acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. In light of the foregoing, I find that both AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 
26(b)(1)-(3) apply.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, and 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
 Here, Applicant answered “No” on his June 2014 SCA in response to questions 
a) inquiring whether he had illegally used any controlled substance, for example 
marijuana, since the age of 16 or in the preceding seven years, and b) asking whether 
he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while maintaining a security 
clearance.7 In truth, Applicant consumed marijuana in 2012 while maintain a security 
clearance. Moreover, Applicant was initially not forthcoming regarding all relevant facts 
about his marijuana use during a September 2014 polygraph, revealing previously 
concealed information only after being questioned speifically. Therefore, these two 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Potentially 
applicable in this matter is AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, untrustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant knew that providing correct answers on his SCA and proactively 
volunteering candid answers during the polygraph could make him “look really bad” and 
possibly jeopardize his professional aspirations. Therefore, he did not mention the 2012 
cookie incident. Under this guideline, it is not Applicant’s drug use that poses security 
concerns, it is the concealment of the facts related to that use. Granted, as noted under 
the preceding guideline, the facts related to his drug involvement are unique; the facts 
related to his lack of candor are not.  
 
Applicant’s testimony and demeanor at the hearing, and the favorable 
impressions of his witnesses, all reflect that Applicant is presently capable of future 
good judgment. He now appreciates the significance of a reliable and forthcoming 
nature when maintaining a security clearance. I find that AG ¶ 17(c) applies in part. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
                                                          
7 As noted infra, the facts contained in SOR allegation 1.d are inconsistent with the rest of the record, and 
the Allegation, along with the corrected record on the years noted in a 2016 subject interview, are found 
in favor of Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
8 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s past drug involvement and 
substance misuse, as well as issues of personal conduct, I considered his present life, 
candor and bearing at the hearing, and the entire record as a whole. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old assistant engineer. He completed his post-secondary 
education at the master’s level, worked for the same employer since 2016, and was first 
granted a security clearance in 2005 while working for another employer. He is single 
and has no children.  
 
In July 2012, Applicant was at a gathering with friends. Despite his suspicions 
regarding what appeared to be a popular–pre concert treat, he set aside his concerns 
and ingested marijuana. The effect was unpleasant. After the fact, Applicant decided to 
be more conscientious, as well as to never use the drug in the future.  
 
In 2014, he permitted a friend to take two of his prescribed oxycodone pills, 
ostensibly for back pain. What the intentions of the friend were regarding these tablets 
is unknown. What was credibly shown, however, was that Applicant was not aware of 
the repercussions from sharing prescribed medications with a friend who had the same 
prescription and a legitimate medical history regarding his need for the drug. Now aware 
of why this was both ill-advised and illegal, it is highly unlikely Applicant will again share 
prescription medications with others. Applicant mitigated drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns. 
 
Applicant’s personal conduct security concerns arise from concealing his drug 
use. Such intentional omissions are particularly worrisome. Most troubling, however, is 
that Applicant was maintaining a security clearance when he withheld relevant 
information on his June 2014 SCA and, initially, during his September 2014 polygraph 
test. He had maintained a security clearance since 2005. He knew or should have 
known that regardless of how he viewed or rationalized the instances at issue, he was 
obligated and expected to be candid with regard to all relevant facts.  
 
Candor, in this matter, should have included disclosing his use of marijuana, 
intentional or unintentional. Instead, he purposefully withheld information that he felt 
would make him “look really bad” and possibly jeopardize his professional aspirations. 
Given these facts, and the time line of the events leading from the time of his drug use 
to his ultimate disclosure, I find that less than five years is insufficient to reestablish the 
needed level of trust to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
