KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The extent to which payments under a payment plan establish an aspect of the
mitigating condition depends on the circumstances of a given case. Applicant owes $192,000 to
the IRS and $19,000 to his state tax authority.  Applicant entered into the payment plan with the
IRS in July 2016.  The record contains evidence that Applicant made five monthly payments.
Applicant is to continue making monthly payments until the debt is resolved, which would occur
after about four years of payments. Given other significant financial obligations that Applicant
must fulfill, such as child support payments, and a paucity of evidence as to his ordinary
expenses that will need to be balanced with his tax payments, Applicant has not established
compliance sufficient to meet the Egan standard. Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 16-01726.a1
DATE: 02/28/2018
DATE: February 28, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-01726
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 22, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 31, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel granted Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
decision was unsupported by the weight of the record evidence.  Consistent with the following, we
reverse. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Federal contractor since 2011.  Applicant disclosed on his
security clearance application (SCA) that he had failed to file and pay Federal taxes for tax years
2010, 2012, and 2013.  He also failed to pay Federal taxes for 2014.  He had filed his returns by the
time he completed his SCA but had not paid his tax debt.  In 2016, the IRS filed a lien against
Applicant in the amount of $192,000.  
Applicant attributed his tax problem to a reduction in income for 2011.  In that year he took
off two months to address a medical issue, resulting in a diminution in pay.1  As a consequence, he
could not meet recurring obligations, such as his $3,400 per month child support payments.  He
stated that his loss of income and his payment of college tuition on behalf of his oldest child
diminished his ability to pay his taxes.
In late 2015, Applicant’s lawyer negotiated a plan to resolve a $19,000 debt to his state tax
authorities.  He agreed to pay over $1,000 a month to resolve this debt.  In addition, Applicant
reached an agreement with the IRS to pay $1,900 a month, increasing over time as other obligations
such as child support diminish, to discharge his Federal tax obligation.  The tax lien will remain in
place until Applicant has satisfied his Federal tax debt.  As of December 2016, Applicant was in
compliance with his payment agreement with the IRS.  He has maintained his consumer credit
accounts in good standing.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s failure to have paid his Federal taxes for the years in
question met the criteria for two disqualifying conditions: a history of not meeting financial
1Applicant told his clearance investigator in 2015 that he had voluntarily entered an alcohol treatment program. 
Item 10, 2011 and 2015 Clearance Interview Summaries, at p. 12.
2
obligations2 and failure to file Federal, state, or local income tax return or failure to pay annual
Federal, state, or local income tax as required.3  In further concluding that he had met his burden of
persuasion as to mitigation, the Judge cited to his payment plans with state and Federal tax
authorities.  Citing to mitigating conditions 20(d)4 and 20(g),5 the Judge concluded that Applicant
had demonstrated compliance with his payment plans and that his tax problems are under control.6 
Discussion
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s decision failed to address significant contrary
record evidence, thereby impairing her analysis.  He argues that the Judge failed to examine the
evidence as a cumulative whole.  After considering the record that was before the Judge, we find
Department Counsel’s arguments to be persuasive.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
2Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 19(c).
3Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 19(g).
4Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(d): “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”  
5Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g): “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”
6The Judge also cited to Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(c): “the individual has received or is receiving financial
counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”  There is nothing in the record to suggest
that Applicant’s tax representation firm satisfies the requirement for a counseling service.  
3
Department Counsel bases his argument to a large extent on the size of Applicant’s tax debt,
the few payments that he had made under his payment plan as of the close of the record, and on a
paucity of evidence of an actual nexus between Applicant’s circumstances and his failure to pay his
tax debt.  In noting the Judge’s reliance on mitigating condition 20(g),  Department Counsel
acknowledges that Applicant has established payment plans with the IRS and his state tax
authorities, but he argues that the few payments that Applicant had made by the close of the record
preclude a conclusion that he is in compliance sufficient to meet his burden of persuasion as to
mitigation.  
The extent to which payments under a payment plan establish this aspect of the mitigating
condition will depend on the circumstances of a given case.  In the case before us, Applicant owes
$192,000 to the IRS and $19,000 to his state tax authority.7  Applicant entered into the payment plan
with the IRS in July 2016.  The record contains evidence that Applicant made five monthly
payments (August-December 2016) before the record closed.  Under the plan, Applicant is to
continue making monthly payments until the debt is resolved, which would occur after about four
years of payments. Moreover, given evidence of other significant financial obligations that
Applicant must fulfill, such as child support payments, and a paucity of evidence as to his ordinary
expenses that will need to be balanced with his tax payments, it is not clear from the record that
Applicant has established compliance sufficient to meet the Egan standard or that he will necessarily
be able to make his payments for the several years remaining on his plan.  The Judge’s analysis does
not consider whether, under the circumstances of this case, Applicant’s plan is equivalent to a
promise to discharge his debts in the future, which is not enough to establish a track record of debt
resolution.  See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 14-04565 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2015).
Applicant’s reply brief contains substantial new evidence.  The Board is not permitted to
consider new evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Moreover, as Department Counsel argues, even if an applicant has paid his debts or made
arrangements to resolve them, a Judge may still consider the underlying circumstances for what they 
reveal about the applicant’s judgment and reliability.  By the same token a Judge may consider a
paucity of mitigating evidence in evaluating whether the applicant has met his or her burden of
persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02246 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2017).  
In this case, the Judge cited to Applicant’s two-months of diminished income during which
he received medical attention.  Department Counsel argues that the record does not establish a nexus
between this circumstance and Applicant’s tax deficiencies.  That is, it does not show how two
months of reduced pay resulted in a tax liability of the extent alleged in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant.  Moreover, the Judge failed meaningfully to address evidence that Applicant lacked the
funds to pay his income tax due in part to his payments for his daughter’s tuition.  While it is
understandable that an applicant would want to assist his offspring in paying for higher education,
in a case like this, Applicant’s payments could suggest misplaced priorities.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
7The back taxes owed to the state were not alleged in the SOR and the record contains no proof of payments
to the state under the purported repayment plan.
4
No. 09-03724 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2010), in which a Judge denied the applicant a clearance due,
in part, to his having prioritized such things as additional education over his responsibility to pay
his debts.  At the least, tuition payments for an offspring old enough to attend college do not
constitute matters that were outside Applicant’s control.  As it stands, the record does not establish
a connection between Applicant’s personal circumstances and his failure to address his legal
obligation to pay his taxes.
We note other things in the record that undercut the Judge’s favorable analysis.  For example,
despite Applicant’s contention that his loss of pay in 2011 was at the root of his tax delinquencies,
the record contains evidence that he has previously had tax liens entered against him.  For example,
Item 6, a Public Trust Questionnaire, discloses a tax lien dated in late 1999, and Item 7, a credit
report, shows two tax liens filed against him in late 2005.  The existence of tax problems that
antedate those alleged in the SOR contravene Applicant’s claim that his current delinquencies are
due to recent, unusual circumstances.8  
More significant is the Judge’s finding that Applicant had not merely failed to pay his taxes
but had failed even to file his returns.  Assuming arguendo that there is some mitigating force to
evidence of Applicant’s medical treatment and loss of pay during 2011, such an occurrence would
not explain why he failed to file his returns on time in the first place, as the law requires.  The duty
to file returns and the duty to pay taxes when due are correlative obligations.  Even an excusable
inability to pay, however, does not necessarily mitigate evidence that for multiple years an applicant
did not submit his or her returns.  Indeed, failure to file tax returns by itself can be a reason to deny
a clearance.  Such a failure suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-
established government rules and regulations, voluntary compliance with which is essential for
protecting classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03208 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar 7, 2017).
To sum up, the record evidence shows that Applicant amassed a substantial debt to the IRS
as well as one to tax authorities in his state of residence.  The evidence does not establish a nexus
between Applicant’s diminution in income and his asserted inability to pay his taxes.  Neither has
Applicant provided evidence of his recurring expenses, precluding a meaningful analysis of his
ability to follow through on his payment plan.  Applicant has had tax liens filed against him in the
past, and his failure to have filed his returns is an independent reason to doubt his eligibility for a
clearance, one which evidence of a loss of income or a recent payment plan are not sufficient to
mitigate.  As Department Counsel argues, the Judge failed to address Applicant’s circumstances as
a whole, resulting in a Decision that does not consider important aspects of the case and runs
contrary to the weight of the evidence.
8In a clearance interview conducted in 2011, Applicant was confronted with these tax liens and denied any
knowledge of them.  Item 10 at p. 6.  However, as stated above, Applicant disclosed a 1999 tax lien on his Public Trust
Questionnaire.  Item 6 at p. 7.  The most plausible reading of the evidence is that the one discussed in the interview is
the same as the one addressed in the questionnaire.  Applicant’s denial of a tax lien that he had previously disclosed is
an inconsistent statement that has some impact upon his credibility.  
5
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
