 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-02986 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Adrienne Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Pro se 
 
February 15, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on February 26, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On November 17, 2016, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 28, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on January 22, 2017. The case was assigned to me on January 31, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on February 
23, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 12, 2017.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through G, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on April 19, 2017. Applicant requested that the record remain open for 
the receipt of additional exhibits. He submitted Applicant Exhibit H on April 25, 2017, 
which was admitted without objection. At his request, the record remained open until 
October 10, 2017 for additional exhibits. No further exhibits were received from Applicant 
by that date and the record closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 40 years old, married for the second time, and has four children. 
Applicant is a retired E-7 in the Navy. He is seeking to retain national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. (Applicant Exhibit F; Tr. 55-58.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a history of having past-due debts. Therefore he is potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all three allegations in the SOR with 
explanations. He also submitted additional evidence to support his request for a finding 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he was indebted for a past-due second mortgage debt 
in the amount of $4,264. The second mortgage loan balance was $40,371. Applicant 
stated that this house was part of his divorce from his first wife in 2014. The ex-wife was 
supposed to make payments on the house, and did not do so. Beginning in 2012 Applicant 
began arranging a short sale of the house, which finally occurred in 2015. As part of the 
settlement from the short sale the second mortgage holder received $3,329.71. The 
second mortgage holder cancelled the remainder of the debt and provided Applicant a 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006; as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Form 1099 indicating that $31,871.46 of debt was written off. This debt is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibits C, D, E, and H: Tr. 22-29.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $16,994 for a charged-off credit card debt. According 
to Applicant, he and his ex-wife were ordered to each make payments on half of this debt 
as part of their divorce. Applicant stated he paid on this debt for approximately two years 
and then stopped when his ex-wife refused to make any payments on the debt because 
of spite. The most recent credit report in the record, dating from January 2017, indicates 
the last payment on this debt was in August 2013. (Government Exhibit 5; Tr. 23, 33-36, 
58-59.) 
 
 The last hearing on this divorce was in 2014. Applicant testified that his attorney 
and the divorce court told him at that time not to make any more payments on this debt 
until his ex-wife agreed to pay her half. A divorce court hearing was supposed to take 
place in June 2017. Applicant testified that he hoped to resolve the debt situation at that 
time. Applicant was given from April to October 2017 to provide a written statement from 
the court or his attorney confirming the fact that he had been instructed not to make 
payments on this debt, or any additional information from the court. No such statement, 
or any other information, was received. This debt is not resolved. (Applicant Exhibits A 
and B; Tr. 23, 31-32, 34-40.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing $3,150 for a charged-off credit card debt. Applicant 
stated that his failure to pay off this debt was due to a bank error, when the bank failed to 
automatically make payments on the account. He has not yet settled this account with the 
credit card holder. No current payments have been made on this account. This debt is 
not resolved. (Tr. 40-46.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his current financial situation is stable. He makes a sufficient 
income, is able to maintain his household without problems, and the most recent credit 
report in the record shows no new delinquent accounts. (Government Exhibit 5; Applicant 
Exhibits A and B; Tr. 46-47, 52-55, 59-62.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
 
 
4 
 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a severely past-due mortgage, which he did not or could not resolve, 
as well as two charged-off credit card debts. Both of these conditions apply, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not mitigated all the allegations in the SOR. While subparagraph 1.a 
is resolved, the situation regarding the two credit card debts is not resolved. According to 
his own testimony, Applicant owes at least half of the debt in subparagraph 1.b, 
approximately $8,000. He was given six months to provide documentation from the court 
or his lawyer confirming that he was told not to pay this debt. No such documentation was 
provided. Accordingly, it is unproven that he is not responsible for the entire $16,000 debt. 
In addition, no payments have been made on subparagraph 1.c. None of the cited 
 
 
6 
 
 
mitigating conditions have application in this case. Paragraph 1 is found against 
Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Applicant was unable to show that he has acted 
responsibly with regard to his debt issues. Overall, the record evidence does create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a 
security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national 
security eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
