 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-03994  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Alison O’Connell, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 3, 2016; and June 20, 2011, Applicant submitted Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIPS.) (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)  
On January 10, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 1, 2017. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 4.)  On 
May 2, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 15 Items, were 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
received by Applicant on June 16, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded in an undated 
submission and had no objections to the Government’s evidence.  DOHA assigned the 
case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 15 are admitted into evidence, and 
going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 15.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and married.  He complete some college and received a 
certificate.  Applicant holds the position as a CAT II Linguist with a defense contractor.    
Applicant joined the active Army Reserves in April 2014 and he continues to serve.  A 
security clearance is necessary in connection with his employment.   
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.   
 
 The SOR alleges eighteen delinquent debts of the Applicant totaling in excess of 
$10,000.  Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  Credit reports 
of the Applicant dated October 1, 2011; March 7, 2014; January 4, 2016; January 14, 
2016; and January 6, 2017, reflect that each of the debts set forth in the SOR remain 
owing.  He has been employed with his current employer since December 2015.      
 
 Applicant explained that between 2001 and October 2015 he regularly sent his 
parents in Mauritania $300 every two to three months, to provide for their financial 
support.  He also had more expenses then he could afford partially due to a faulty car 
that he purchased in 2006.  He further stated that he trusted a friend to pay his bills 
while he was out of the country, and the friend failed to pay his debts.  Over the years, 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has claimed a number of times that he was making efforts to address his 
financial difficulties, but nothing much, if anything, was ever accomplished.  In 2011, 
Applicant stated that he intended to look into debt consolidation options.  In 2014, he 
claimed that he intended to pay all of his debts off.  In 2015, Applicant stated that he 
was working with creditors scheduling payments arrangements to address his 
outstanding debts.  In January 2016, he stated that he planned to contact his creditors 
identified in the SOR to make payment arrangements.  In his response to the SOR 
dated March 2017, Applicant claims to be working with a debt consolidation company to 
address his debts.  Some of the debts listed in the SOR have been included in the 
Applicant’s debt consolidation plan, others were not.  The following delinquent debts 
listed in the SOR remain owing:  
 
 1.a.  A judgment was entered by a creditor against the Applicant in the amount of 
$584.  Applicant had agreed to pay $25 a month until the debt was paid.  He does not 
provide any evidence of payments, and the debt does not appear to be included in his 
debt consolidation plan.                  
 
  1.b.  A delinquent internet cable service account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $241.  The debt does not appear to be included in his debt 
consolidation plan.   
 
 1.c.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $104.  The debt does not appear to be included in his debt consolidation 
plan.   
 
 1.d.  A delinquent T-Mobile account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $1,478.    The debt is listed in the debt consolidation plan.  
 
 1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $404.  The debt is not included in his debt consolidation plan. 
 
 1.f.  A delinquent debt owed to a telephone company for an account was placed 
for collection in the approximate amount of $149.  The debt is listed in the debt 
consolidation plan.     
 
 1.g.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank for an account that was 120 past due or 
more, in the approximate amount of $148, with a total balance of $490 remains unpaid.  
The debt is listed in his debt consolidation program.   
 
 1.h. A delinquent military credit card debt for an account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $2,538 remains unpaid.  The debt does not appear to be 
included in his debt consolidation plan.    
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.i.  A delinquent department store debt for an account that was 120 days past 
due or more past due in the approximate amount of $503 remains unpaid.  The debt is 
listed in the debt consolidation plan.    
 1.j.  A delinquent debt owed to a bank for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $442 remains owing. The debt does not appear 
to be included in the debt consolidation plan. 
         
  1.k.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the approximate amount 
of $647.  The does not appear to be included in the debt consolidation plan.     
 
 1.l.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the approximate amount 
of $222.  The debt does not appear to be included in his debt consolidation plan.    
 
 1.m.  A delinquent credit card account was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $209.  The debt does not appear to be included in the debt consolidation 
plan. 
 
 1.n.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $709 remains owing.  The debt does not appear to be 
included in the debt consolidation plan.   
 
 1.o.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $224.  The debt is included in the debt 
consolidation plan.     
 
 1.p.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $230 remains owing.  The debt does not appear 
to be included in his debt consolidation plan.   
 
 1.q. A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $1,486 remains unpaid.  The debt is included in 
the debt consolidation plan.    
 
 1.r.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $322 remains unpaid.  The debt does not 
appear to be included in his debt consolidation plan.    
 
 Applicant states that he is trustworthy reflected by his job responsibilities and 
duties to the United States. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially  
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies dating back to at least 2005.  
He incurred eighteen delinquent debts that he has not paid.  Under the particular 
circumstances here, Applicant has not acted reasonably or shown good judgment in 
resolving his debts.  These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes no conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could possibly mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties.  However, even 
assuming: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under the particular circumstances here, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  Applicant 
has been telling the Government since 2005, for at least twelve years, that he was 
working to resolve his indebtedness.  Over the years, he obviously did little to nothing 
towards his delinquent debts.  In response to the FORM dated June 2017, Applicant 
submitted a letter and a Statement of Payment and Records, showing that he has finally 
hired a debt resolution company to assist him in resolving his indebtedness.  It also 
shows that many of the creditors listed in the SOR are included in the repayment plan.  
However, it also shows that Applicant recently started the program, as the debt amounts 
still remain close to what was originally owed.  At this point, Applicant has not submitted 
any compelling evidence that he has established a meaningful track record of 
repayment, or that he had a basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of his delinquent 
debts.  Applicant must continue to pay his debts according to the plan and resolve his 
indebtedness.  The record establishes no mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a serious 
problem of procrastination in paying his delinquent debts, or a real problem 
overspending.  In either case, by not paying his debts in a timely fashion, he has shown 
that he is financially irresponsible.  Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance.  He 
has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
