 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03510 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On January 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On February 14, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR. On March 6, 2017, 
2014, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 16, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals Office (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On 
May 18, 2017, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 13, 2017. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant did not call any witnesses, testified, and did not offer any 
exhibits.  
 
 I held the record open until July 28, 2017, and granted an extension until 
November 9, 2017, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were received into 
evidence without objection. On June 21, 2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 
8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under 
the new AGs, as required.1 
   
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. 
Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old supervisory engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since July 2016. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. Applicant has successfully held a security 
clearance since 1981 when he began working in the defense industry, a 37-year 
period. (GE 1, Tr. 10-12, 40)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1975. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science degree in mechanical engineering in May 1981. Applicant married in May 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
1993, and has an adult son and an adult stepson. His wife retired as an elementary 
school cook in May 2017. Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 
12-15) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains two separate debts: (1) a credit card collection 
account for $28,860; and (2) a home equity collection account for $23,545.  (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to two unexpected medical 
emergencies that occurred during the timeframe of 2011 through 2014. The first was 
being diagnosed with Graves’ disease. Applicant’s treatment included removal of his 
thyroid and extensive radiation treatments. Shortly after recovering from Graves’ 
disease, he was diagnosed with prostate cancer, which required additional treatment. 
He lives in a rural community with limited medical care and had to seek treatment with 
out of network providers. As a result, he incurred over $20,000 in uncovered medical 
bills. Applicant stated that he fell behind on his credit card bills and ran up a home 
equity loan “to the max.” During this time, Applicant was also helping put his son 
through college. (Tr. 16-19, 26-31) 
 
Applicant attempted to negotiate settlements with his SOR creditors. When 
those attempts proved to be unsuccessful, he retained the services of a debt 
consolidation company (DCC) in 2010. Applicant paid the DCC about $14,000 over a 
two-year period, but the DCC failed to pay down the debts as agreed and Applicant 
ceased doing business with them. Applicant then tried to withdraw funds from his 
401K account to pay off these debts, but was unable to do so because he did not 
qualify for a hardship withdrawal. (SOR answer; Tr. 19-23, 32-35) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had retained the services of a 
bankruptcy attorney and requested additional time to follow through with completing 
the bankruptcy process. (Tr. 25-26, 36, 39-42) He stated that, “I plan on working until I 
get out of the mess, get some of the debt cleared up.” (39)   
 
Post-hearing, Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney provided documentation that he 
had filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition on October 24, 2017, with further 
documentation that bi-weekly payments of $1,151 are withheld from his payroll and 
forwarded directly to the Chapter 13 Trustee. Both of Applicant’s SOR debts are 
included in that petition.  Applicant completed the mandatory financial counseling 
required to file bankruptcy. His budget reflects a net monthly income of $1,460. (AE B, 
AE J) SOR DEBTS ¶¶ 1.a AND 1.b ARE BEING RESOLVED. 
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted three work-related reference letters, one from a co-worker 
and two from supervisors. His co-worker has known him “since 1990” and the two 
 
4 
 
 
supervisors have known him since the “early 80’s” and “over twenty years,” 
respectively. The letters collectively describe Applicant as conscientious, honest, and 
trustworthy. (AE C - E) Applicant’s most recent performance evaluations document 
top-level performance. (AE G, AE H) His reference letters and performance 
evaluations reflect his past contributions to the national defense.  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
 
5 
 
 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, 
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or 
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater 
risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to 
generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of 
income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal 
activity, including espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government established disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted because of Applicant’s medical 
emergencies were beyond his control and could not have been anticipated. AG ¶¶ 
 
7 
 
 
20(c) and 20(d) are fully applicable. Applicant received the mandatory financial 
counseling required to file bankruptcy and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
his creditors through his Chapter 13 wage earner plan. Before filing bankruptcy, 
Applicant attempted to resolve his debts with his creditors, but was unable to do so.2 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 37 years of sustained and honorable service in the defense industry 
weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his 
SOR debts are being addressed. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in 
the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
                                                          
2 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
After unsuccessfully trying to resolve his two SOR debts on his own, Applicant 
retained the services of a bankruptcy attorney. His attorney filed a Chapter 13 wage 
earner plan that includes repayment of Applicant’s two SOR debts. Due to 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite Applicant’s 
recent financial setback, it is clear from his actions that he is in the process of 
regaining financial responsibility.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his performance evaluations, 
his reference letters, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
