 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-03569 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security 
concerns about his tax issues and delinquent debts. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 31, 2014. On 
January 23, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.1 
  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, issuing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on 
or after that date.2 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did 
not affect my decision in this case.  
 
 Applicant initially answered the SOR on February 24, 2017, and he filed a 
complete answer on April 6, 2017, requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me 
on September 7, 2017. On November 3, 2017, a Notice of Hearing was issued 
scheduling the hearing for November 21, 2017, a date agreed to by the parties. The 
hearing convened as scheduled.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I held the record 
open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit documentation. He subsequently 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. 
The record closed on January 3, 2018. DOHA received the hearing transcript on 
December 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a-1.j). His admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He has been married twice. His first marriage (1987-
1988) was annulled. He remarried two years ago. His wife gave birth six weeks before 
the hearing. He also has an adult daughter, age 28. After high school, Applicant served 
in the U.S. Army from 1984 to 1987. He then spent 20 years as a county corrections 
officer (1988-2008). Applicant has worked as a security officer for his current employer 
since 2008. He currently holds a security clearance. (Tr. 12, 29-36, 66; GE 1) 
 
  The SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a-1.j) include unfiled tax returns, past-due state and 
federal income taxes, unpaid judgments and other debts, a mortgage in foreclosure, 
and a dismissed bankruptcy petition. The allegations are established by Applicant’s 
admissions, his credit reports, and other documents in the record.3 (GE 1 – GE 5)  
 
Applicant testified that from about 2008 to 2015, he provided several hundred 
dollars a month in financial support to his family members, including his daughter, sister, 
mother, and grandmother. (Tr. 34-35, 40-42; GE 5) Applicant met his wife in 2011. Soon 
thereafter, he also began paying her bills. He provided at least $1,000 a month in 
                                                          
2 Applicant confirmed at the hearing that he had received the new AGs. (Transcript (Tr.) 8)  
 
3 On his SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had unpaid federal tax debt and a debt to a homeowner’s 
association (HOA). (GE 1 at 26-29) 
 
 
3 
 
 
financial support, for her rent, utilities and other expenses. Applicant began falling 
behind on his own bills in about 2012. He realized he should have paid his own bills, but 
also felt a responsibility to his family and his girlfriend (now his wife) (Tr. 34-35, 42-44; 
GE 5) 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in July 2015. He declared 
about $208,000 in assets and just under $240,000 in liabilities. (GE 4) He took a 
financial counseling class when he filed bankruptcy. The bankruptcy petition was 
dismissed in February 2016 when he was not able to make the first payment, of about 
$1,500. (Tr. 35-36, 61) 
 
Applicant stopped paying his mortgage in August 2014, before he filed 
bankruptcy. As of early 2016, he owed about $186,000, and was about $22,000 past 
due. The home later went into foreclosure. (Tr.47; GE 3; GE 4) After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted a court document, filed in November 2017, which appears to 
indicate that the home was sold at auction. It also says that if the proceeds from the 
sale are insufficient to pay the secured debt, “the account will result in a deficiency.” (AE 
B) The most recent credit report in the record, from November 2016, shows no balance 
due on the mortgage, and no deficiency is indicated. (GE 4) (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a $2,258 charged-off credit card debt. It remains unpaid. SOR ¶ 1.d 
is a $432 charged-off credit card debt, which has now been paid. (AE C)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($1,253) and 1.g ($1,066) are judgments brought against Applicant 
by his HOA. Applicant testified that the debts have now been paid by garnishment. (Tr. 
49, 55-56) He provided a copy of the garnishment order for debt ¶ 1.f, filed in May 2016 
(AE G), but he provided no documents showing that either judgment has been satisfied.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e is a $1,264 state tax lien entered against Applicant in February 2014. 
(GE 2, GE 3) SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant has incurred about $8,000 of past-due 
state income tax debt from tax years 2009-2014. In his bankruptcy petition, Applicant 
disclosed that for tax years 2009, 2011 and 2014, he owed $8,112 in past-due state 
income taxes. (GE 4 at 17) 
 
Applicant has incurred about $15,000 of past-due federal income tax debt from 
tax years 2009-2014. He reported in his bankruptcy petition that for tax years 2011-
2014, he owed $15,471 in past-due federal income taxes. (GE 4 at 17) (SOR ¶ 1.i) 
 
Applicant testified that his tax problems began when he did his taxes and he 
realized he owed more than he could pay. (Tr. 49) He initially sought assistance from a 
tax relief organization, but he said they charged him too much money. (Tr. 59-60) He 
testified that he intended to take out a loan against his 401(k) pension at work to pay his 
tax debts, but was hesitant to do so before knowing the outcome of his clearance 
adjudication. (Tr. 37-39, 64-65) Applicant provided proof of one $2,000 payment 
towards his state tax debt, and one $2,000 payment towards his federal tax debt, both 
in December 2017. (AE E, AE F) 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2014 state and federal income tax returns as required. 
(SOR ¶ 1.h) Applicant also acknowledged that he had yet to file his state and federal 
income tax returns for tax year 2016 (due in April 2017, before the hearing). If he finds 
that he owes taxes, Applicant sometimes waits a year to file his returns. He 
acknowledged that he was wrong to do so. (Tr. 58-59) Applicant provided no 
documentation to show that his 2014 state and federal tax returns have been filed.  
 
Applicant moved in with his wife three months before the hearing. He also 
received a promotion and was transferred to a job location near where they now live. He 
works full time, and earns $25 an hour ($1,000 a week, or $52,000 a year). He gets a 
pension from his previous job in corrections, which he estimated at $43,000 annually. 
His wife is a city government employee. He estimated she makes about $1,500 a 
month. His finances have improved since he and his wife started living together. He 
estimated that he has about $2,000 left over each month.4 (Tr. 31-33, 67-68)  
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by 
the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
4 Since Applicant and his wife have a new baby, his $2,000 monthly surplus may no longer be operative.  
 
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The guideline sets forth several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.  
 
 For several years, Applicant has had delinquent debts and judgments, including 
a foreclosed mortgage and significant state and federal income tax debt. He also has 
unfiled state and federal income tax returns. AG ¶¶ 19 (a), (c) and (f) apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when he fell behind on his debts after he 
began providing significant financial assistance to his family members and to his 
girlfriend (now his wife). While this was admirable and likely done with all good 
intentions, Applicant did not act responsibly in neglecting his own finances. Nor can his 
financial predicament be considered a circumstance beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant went through credit counseling during bankruptcy, but he was unable to 
make the first $1,500 payment, and the bankruptcy was dismissed. He has not 
established that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not fully apply. Applicant’s financial issues are ongoing. He has not 
established that they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s mortgage was foreclosed, and the home sold at auction. It does not 
appear from Applicant’s most recently available credit report (GE 2) that a balance is 
owed. The two HOA debts were subject to a garnishment order, and may be resolved, 
as Applicant claims. However, he provided insufficient documentation to verify this. 
Even so, resolution of a debt through garnishment does not constitute a good-faith effort 
 
7 
 
 
to resolve the debt.6 SOR ¶ 1.d is the only debt in the SOR that can be considered 
resolved through Applicant’s own responsible actions.  
 
 Applicant has several years’ worth of past-due state and federal income taxes. 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,264 state tax lien, listed on credit reports) is likely included in SOR ¶ 1.j 
($8,000 in past-due state taxes from 2009-2014, disclosed in the bankruptcy petition). 
SOR ¶ 1.e is therefore duplicative and found for Applicant.7  
 
 Applicant provided two $2,000 checks, both paid in late December 2017, towards 
his state and federal income tax debts. This belated effort is insufficient to establish his 
good-faith efforts to resolve the debts. He provided no indication that he has a payment 
plan established going forward to resolve them. 
 
 Applicant’s unfiled tax returns are not attributable to circumstances beyond his 
control. He decided not to file his tax returns when he could not pay what he owed. 
While this may be partly attributable to his decision to help his family members in their 
times of need, his decision not to file his state and federal tax returns for several years 
was not reasonable. Applicant also did not provide any documentation to establish that 
his 2014 state and federal income tax returns have yet been filed, even belatedly. He 
also testified that his 2016 state and federal returns remain unfiled. The 2016 returns 
are not alleged, so I cannot consider them as disqualifying conduct. However, I can and 
do consider them in weighing mitigation.8 AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009) (“On its face, satisfaction of a debt through the 
involuntary establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith 
initiation of repayment by the debtor.”) 
 
7 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  
 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Although Applicant has begun to 
resolve his delinquent debts, he needs to establish more of a track record of financial 
responsibility, as well as more timely and consistent compliance with his tax 
responsibilities, before he can be considered a suitable candidate for access to 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
