 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03519 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 6, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On January 6, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 15, 2017.  She requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.)  On July 25, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 25, 2017, and received by her on August 7, 2017. The 
FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
 
2 
 
FORM. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 7, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as Government 
Exhibits 1 thorough 7.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. She is married with two children.  She has a high 
school diploma.  She is employed with a defense contractor as a Mail Clerk.  She is 
applying for a security clearance in connection with her employment. Applicant began 
working for her current employer in February 2016.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eight delinquent medical accounts that have been placed for collection  
totaling in excess of $38,000.  Applicant admits to each of the delinquent accounts listed 
in in the SOR.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated March 31, 2016; and July 20, 2017; 
confirm the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)      
 
In September 2012, Applicant underwent emergency gall bladder surgery that 
she believed was covered by medical insurance provided for by her previous employer.  
Her insurance claims were subsequently rejected because they recorded Applicant as 
being a citizen of Mexico, and that her coverage extended to medical claims were for 
treatment only in Oman and in Mexico.  Applicant claims that this was a typographical 
error that is being corrected so that they claims will be paid.      
 
Applicant claims that each of the delinquent medical accounts listed in the SOR 
are currently in dispute with her previous employer with whom she worked from October 
2011 through February 2014.  She contends that her employment contract stated that 
all medical expenses were to be covered by the employer, and that the issue is in the 
process of being remedied and paid.  Applicant failed to provide any supporting 
 
3 
 
documentation to show the dispute with her former employer or any other evidence to 
support the fact that the debts are in the process of being resolved and paid.  
Furthermore, she has not identified any specific actions that she has taken to resolve 
this issue nor provided any corroborating documentation to show the actions she has 
taken, if any to resolve the issue.  Accordingly to information set forth in her security 
clearance background interview dated April 8, 2016, the most recent communication 
from the insurance company was in January 2014, when Applicant spoke to her 
supervisor and the human resource director about the medical bills and they did nothing 
about the issue.  There is no evidence in the record as to whether the Applicant has 
spoken to the insurance company since January 2014, or whether she has a legitimate 
basis to contest her debts.  She states that she does not intend to pay the bills.      
 
The following medical accounts became owing:  
 
1.a.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $450.  The account remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)    
 
 1.b.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $1,660.  The account remains outstanding.    (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.c.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $265.  The account remains outstanding.    (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.d.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $1,563.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.e.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $560.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
1.f.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $711.  The account remains owing.   (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.g.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $32,280.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
 1.h.  A delinquent debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$646.  The debt remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
   
 There is no documentation in the record to show that Applicant has done 
anything to resolve her debt.  The record is void of any mitigation.     
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
 
5 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  Although she 
claims that the debts are in dispute, she has provided nothing to substantiate her claim, 
or show whether she has a legitimate basis to contest these debts. The record lacks 
appropriate documentation to substantiate the information she has provided.  She has 
not indicated that she has set up payment arrangements to resolve the debt, or that she 
has otherwise settled the debt.  There is no evidence in the record to prove that she has 
done anything to resolve her delinquent debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant has provided no documentation to corroborate her claim that she is 
disputing the debts, or that she has a legitimate basis to contest the debts, or that they 
are being resolved by the insurance company.  Under the particular circumstances 
here, Applicant has failed to establish that she has acted reasonably or responsibly with 
respect to her debts.  As it stands, Applicant has not addressed any of her delinquent 
debt, nor has she demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  Most 
importantly, it has not been demonstrated that her current financial problems are under 
control.  Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to prove mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  There is no documentation to corroborate her 
explanation for these debts.  Furthermore, Applicant has not demonstrated that she is 
financially responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
7 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
