 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-03905  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant resolved some delinquent debts, but not a large student loan. He failed 
to mitigate the resulting financial considerations’ security concerns. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD 
after September 1, 2006.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on February 8, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
2) On March 17, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant that day and received by him on March 21, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely 
submitted a 16-page response to the FORM (Response) in April 2017, which I marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant did not object to the Government’s Items and the 
Government did not object to AE A. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence; AE A 
is admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
this case to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
On January 24, 2018, I emailed Applicant and inquired if he had additional 
documentation of payments made toward his delinquent student loan. (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1) He timely responded to that email and stated that he did not have additional 
evidence and set forth an explanation. I marked his letter as AE B. Department Counsel 
did not have any objections to that exhibit and I am admitting it into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and a high school graduate. He earned an associate’s 
degree in 2007. He was married to his first wife from 2002 to 2012. They have three 
children. He remarried in 2016. He started working for a defense contractor in November 
2010. He had been unemployed for almost two years prior to obtaining that position. (GE 
3; Answer) 
 
 On April 20, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it, he disclosed delinquent debts and stated he was seeking financial counseling to assist 
in resolving his financial problems. (Item 3) He attributed the delinquent debts to his 2012 
divorce, the loss of a second income subsequent to it, his former wife’s addiction, and her 
failure to pay her debts in accordance with their marital settlement agreement. (Item 5) 
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from June 2016, the SOR alleged five debts 
that became delinquent between 2011 and 2012, and totaled almost $100,000. (GE 4) 
The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: The $60,060 student loan debt was charged-off in May 2012. In his 
February 2017 Answer, Applicant stated that he was working with an account 
representative on a plan to begin resolving the debt and intended to use his 2016 tax 
refund to pay it. In his April 2017 Response to the FORM, he submitted copies of three 
checks: one for $400, dated April 17; and two for $200, dated May 1 and May 16. These 
represented payments he made over the phone. He was told that he was eligible to settle 
the debt for 33% of the total amount, but he was unable to do so because he did not have 
enough money available. He intended to continue making payments. (Answer; AE A)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In reply to my inquiry about additional payments on this debt, Applicant stated that 
the creditor would allow him to make payments on the closed and charged-off debt, but 
would not give him any further information about it. Applicant said he then contacted a 
student loan data system and could not locate the debt. He said he does not know what 
else to do about the debt. (HE 1; AE B) However, without further documentation, such as 
an IRS Form 1099-C, confirming that the debt was cancelled and subject to taxes, the 
debt remains unresolved. Applicant has been aware of this debt for at least five years.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: The $20,224 delinquent credit card debt was paid in March 2017. (AE 
A) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: The $17,652 delinquent debt owed for an automobile repossession 
was settled for less money and paid in March 2017. (AE A).   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: The $1,947 delinquent credit card debt was paid in February 2017. (AE 
A)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: Applicant stated he paid the $115 utility bill when he learned of it during 
this investigation. He said it was his ex-wife’s debt. (AE A) It is resolved.  
 
 Applicant submitted evidence that he and his wife enrolled in financial and credit 
counseling, beginning in May 2017. He provided an April 2017 budget. He and his wife’s 
net monthly family income is $5,100, and their expenses total $4,240. He also listed a 
monthly payment of $400 toward his student loan, which is no longer pertinent. He 
submitted three letters of recommendation. All authors recommended that Applicant for 
a security clearance based on his performance. (AE A)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
5 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2011 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under 
the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant offered some evidence from which to conclude that similar problems may 
not recur because he is no longer married to his first wife, who contributed to his 
delinquencies, and he is now married to a woman who helps manage their finances. 
Limited mitigation was established under AG ¶ 20(a). His divorce and subsequently 
related financial difficulties were circumstances beyond his control; however, he did not 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under those circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. Although he resolved four of the five SOR-alleged debts, he presented 
no evidence of financial counseling and there are not clear indications that the largest 
debt, a $60,060 student loan, is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant 
presented evidence that he paid four debts. He established some mitigation of good-faith, 
but not full mitigation, under AG ¶ 20(d, as to those debts, because he did not begin to 
address them until after he received the SOR.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has successfully 
worked for a defense contractor since November 2010. In April 2016, he candidly 
disclosed delinquent debts in his SCA, and stated that he intended to seek financial help 
to resolve them, including his student loan. In January 2017, he received the SOR. In his 
February 2017 Answer, Applicant indicated that he recently began resolving some debts 
and again stated that he intended to resolve the student loan. In his April 2017 Reply, he 
mentioned steps he had taken to address his delinquent student loan. In his February 
2018 response to my inquiry, he stated that he is unable to resolve the $60,060 student 
loan that is his responsibility. Overall, the evidence creates sufficient doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet 
 
 
7 
 
 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b through 1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
