 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01589 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 8, 
2015. On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2016, denying all of the SOR 
allegations. He provided explanations including that he was in a federal loan 
rehabilitation program for his student loans, and he was out of work for several months 
due to back surgery. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2017. On January 19, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for February 1, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant waived 
the 15 days advance notice required by the DOD Directive. 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the 
record open until February 15, 2018 for him to submit additional documents. (Tr. 38, 65) 
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions were collectively marked as AE D and included an 
e-mail dated February 14, 2018 plus a printout of a payment history for 24 months and a 
plan to consolidate his student loans with Navient. He also affirmed that he is starting 
the process of sale of his house to reduce expenses. AE D was admitted without 
objections. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 9, 2018. Department 
Counsel moved to withdraw the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.h at the outset of the hearing. 
That motion was granted.  
 
  Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2006. Applicant has 
been unemployed since he was laid off by a federal contractor in October 2015. He has 
been married for two years and has one child, age two, and two stepchildren. (Tr. 16) 
Applicant had a second son born on January 27, 2017, who died after 13 days in the 
intensive care unit. (Tr. 17) He purchased a home at the end of March 2017. A week 
later, his 36-year-old wife had a devastating stroke and nearly passed away. (Tr. 19) 
She required multiple surgeries and she is still going through rehabilitation. She requires 
a cane or wheelchair and she has been unable to work. She had been earning 
approximately $150,000 a year, as an attorney. (Tr. 46) Applicant is now the sole 
breadwinner, earning $110,000 per year. (Tr. 46) Applicant reports no previous security 
clearance.  
  
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either AG.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 8, 2015, 
security clearance application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on December 
28, 2015. 
 
 
3 
 
 
The SOR alleged eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $62,000, 
including allegations of delinquent student loans in the approximate amount of $55,000 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e, and 1.g). Applicant testified credibly that these student loans are now 
consolidated with Navient and the balance owed is approximately $55,096. (Tr. 27) 
Applicant provided AE A, which showed payments on the student loan debt of $5.00 per 
month from February 2016 to July 2016, to get the loans out of default. (Tr. 28, 30) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a charged-off debt to a jeweler in the amount of $3,545. 
Applicant testified credibly that he paid this debt off. It was for an engagement ring for 
his wife, and it was stolen when she was admitted for treatment for her stroke. (Tr. 30) 
 
Applicant was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2015 and received injuries. 
(Tr. 41, 54) He required neck and back surgeries and was out of work for several 
months. (Tr. 54, 55) He filed a civil lawsuit and recovered a $300,000 (gross) 
settlement. He took home only $125,000 of that amount, after lawyer’s fees and costs. 
(Tr. 41, 42) Applicant testified that he was able to pay off another private $30,000 
student loan that was not included in the SOR. (AE C, Tr. 35) He also was able to 
purchase a house in March 2017. However, after the tragedy struck his wife, Applicant 
had sole responsibility for $3,127 per month mortgage payments. (Tr. 47) So, he was 
unable to make student loan payments. (Tr. 45) The student loans went into default.  
 
Applicant produced post hearing documents showing that his most recent 
payment to Navient on the student loan debt, was in the amount of $50.00 was made on 
February 1, 2018. (AE D) The print-out from Navient also shows a present balance of 
$57,559 owed, and a 24-month history of payments of $176 per month, which Applicant 
made from late 2015, until late 2016. His next payment is due on April 25, 2018 (AE D) 
Applicant’s uncle and aunt helped him out with financial counseling about one year ago. 
(Tr. 51) They helped him formulate a budget. Applicant incurred over $600,000 in 
medical expenses from his wife’s stroke. (Tr. 55) Additionally, he was paying $250 a 
week for a nursing assistant until February 2018. He now pays that amount for child-
care each week. (Tr. 59)  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant was arrested on July 19, 2015 and charged with 
misdemeanor soliciting prostitution. Applicant was preparing to get married around that 
time. He was chatting with a young lady on the street and started to walk away, when 
he was arrested. (Tr. 61) She turned out to be part of a sting operation in which the 
police cast a wide net and did a sweep for prostitution related crimes, resulting in 
dozens of arrests that evening. (Tr. 62) No money exchanged hands and Applicant 
received a citation to appear in court. He pled guilty for expedience sake and served 
community service as part of a deferred prosecution by which the charge was dismissed 
in January 2016. (GE 1, p. 47, Tr. 63) Applicant served as a police cadet briefly and a 
volunteer firefighter in his community for 15 years. His wife is aware of this baseless 
charge, and he had no arrests before or after this one. (Tr. 64)  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, summary of interview, and documents submitted at the hearing. The 
Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3 Applicant has met that burden. Most of 
the delinquent debts have been resolved, or he has an established track record of 
consistent payments to settle them.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 Applicant endured a series of personal tragedies including an automobile 
accident in which he sustained serious injuries, loss of a child, and his wife’s 
catastrophic stroke in March 2017. He has done everything possible to aid her recovery 
and care for his child. These conditions were beyond his control. He has now produced 
relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient evidence to show 
that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He has either paid off, or made consistent 
payments pursuant to a plan, on his delinquent debts. He produced documentation to 
confirm that most of the delinquencies alleged in his SOR have been resolved. He 
intends to settle any remaining delinquent debts and pay off his student loans. The 
mitigating conditions enumerated above in AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows:  
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about an Appellant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
  (b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, and admission, 
and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 Applicant fully disclosed his July 2015 arrest for soliciting prostitution in section 
23 of his SCA. He testified credibly that he did not solicit the prostitute. His case was 
dismissed as part of a deferred-prosecution plea agreement after he completed 
community service. Based on the doctrine of collateral estoppel, I cannot conclude the 
offense did not occur.  
  
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
  
 Applicant was arrested in a sweep conducted by law enforcement for prostitution- 
related crimes almost three years ago. He pled guilty to this misdemeanor to get the 
benefit of a deferred prosecution agreement, by which the case was dismissed after he 
completed community service. He has an otherwise clear criminal history and this arrest 
happened under unusual circumstances and is unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Applicant is caring for his 
recovering wife, and raising a child essentially alone. He has a clean record and he has 
been gainfully employed for most of his adult life. He has struggled to overcome his 
financial travails and pay off his student loans. He is selling his house to reduce 
expenses, and his wife has outstanding earning potential once she is well. Applicant 
testified credibly and persuasively that his finances are now under control. His arrest 
was an aberration. Most importantly, Applicant has addressed the specific allegations in 
the SOR and taken affirmative measures to resolve them. He has met his burden of 
production.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s minor criminal conduct and finances no longer remain a security 
concern. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. He is gainfully employed and managing his financial affairs. The record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline J, 
criminal conduct.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:             For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:                                   Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                 Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
 
