1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00261 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq.  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
and mitigate the security concern stemming from her problematic financial history. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations   
guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 10, 2016, and requested a hearing 
to establish her eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
  
 On November 27, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was 
held. Applicant testified at the hearing and called one fact witness and three combination 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
fact and character witnesses. The Government offered ten exhibits, which were marked 
for identification as GE 1 through 10. Applicant’s counsel objected to GE 3, a report of 
investigation summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the August 2015 
background investigation on the grounds that the report lacked foundation and was not 
authenticated. I sustained the objection and admitted GE 1, 2 and GE 4 through GE 10 
into evidence.2 Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through S were admitted without objection. At 
the request of Applicant, and without objection, the record remained open until December 
4, 2017. Applicant timely submitted AE T and U, which were admitted without objection. 
The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on December 5, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”3 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.4 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).5 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were in effect at the time. My decision and formal 
findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guideline F.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 58 years old and has a Bachelor’s and a Master’s degree. She has 
been divorced since 1995 and has no children. Since December 1998, Applicant has 
been employed by a defense contractor as a training specialist schooling Government 
employees on the use of management systems programs.6 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant filed four bankruptcies, a Chapter 7 in December 
2014 (dismissed in April 2015), a Chapter 13 in August 2014 (dismissed in September 
2014), a Chapter 13 in April 2014 (dismissed in June 2014), and a Chapter 13 in August 
2011 (dismissed in November 2011). The SOR also alleges that Applicant is: (1) indebted 
                                                          
2 Tr. 15-19.   
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
4 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
5 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
6 GE 1; Tr. 40.  
3 
 
to the IRS for a tax lien filed in August 2015 for $33,035; (2) indebted to her state of 
residence for a tax lien filed in September 2015 in the amount of $13,098; and (3) indebted 
on a home loan mortgage account that went into foreclosure in September 2015 with a 
balance due of $247,000.7 Although Applicant denies these allegations “as written,” there 
is record evidence supporting them.8 Beyond Applicant’s denials and the evidence 
supporting the SOR allegations, the story gets somewhat complicated.  
 
In Applicant’s position as a training specialist, she travels to Government facilities 
all over the world (e.g., Europe, Africa), often being out of the country six times a year or 
more, trips that last six to ten days, depending on the destinations.9 Because of being a 
homeowner and frequently absent from the country, she hired a financial advisor (the 
“Advisor”) to attend to her financial matters, principally mortgage payments and taxes. 
She in fact gave him a power of attorney. The Advisor was recommended by associates 
of Applicant who had used the Advisor in the same capacity. Applicant knew the Advisor 
for a few years before retaining him. He told Applicant that he had experience with 
mortgages and mortgage modifications. The arrangement was for the Advisor to handle 
Applicant’s finances when she was on travel.10 The record is not clear exactly when 
Applicant’s arrangement with the Advisor was first consummated. Applicant first mentions 
seeking advice from the Advisor in 2012 after she had fallen behind in her mortgage 
payments.11  
 
  Applicant testified that she knew of the Chapter 7 filing. She directed her Advisor 
to file it, because she was on constant travel, suffered from depression, and had fallen 
into arrears on her mortgage payment.12 That bankruptcy was dismissed, because 
Applicant did not meet the threshold requirements for a Chapter 7.13 Applicant also 
testified that although she was aware of the Chapter 7 filing, she did not learn of the three 
Chapter 13 bankruptcies until they were called to her attention during the August 2015 
                                                          
7 SOR ¶ 1.  
 
8 Answer ¶ 1; GE 6 and 7.  
 
9 Tr. 27, 34, 40, 47, and 51-52.  
 
10 Tr. 26, 36-37, 52-54, 70-73.  
 
11 GE 4.  
 
12 Tr. 53-55.  Applicant was also dealing with her terminally ill father. GE 4. By the time Applicant completed 
her security clearance application in January 2015, her father had died. GE 1.  Applicant provided evidence 
that her health adversely affected her finances. She continues to seek treatment for that condition, and her 
health has improved. AE Q (March 12, 2016, letter from Applicant’s Licensed Certified Social Worker). Tr. 
59. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
13 Answer ¶ 1a; GE 4 (“There weren’t enough creditors to meet the required standards per the trustee.”). 
The dismissal order states that the proceeding was dismissed for failure to complete required filings. It was 
dismissed in April 2015. GE 10.  
 
4 
 
subject interview. Thus, she only learned after the fact, during the clearance process, that 
her Advisor had filed three other bankruptcies on her behalf.14   
 
Sometime in 2015, while she was on travel, Applicant was informed by her Advisor 
that due to being in arrears on her mortgage, her mortgage company planned to foreclose 
on her home. He also informed Applicant that she would need to make a payment of 
$9,800 in order prevent foreclosure. Applicant was surprised by that, because her Advisor 
was supposed to be negotiating a mortgage modification.15 Since Applicant was out of 
town, she arranged for two close friends to pitch in to raise the $9,800 and for one of them 
to deliver the money to the Advisor.16 Applicant learned from one of those friends that 
notwithstanding raising and delivering that payment to the Advisor, the mortgage 
company proceeded to foreclosure. It was later learned that the Advisor never made that 
payment to the mortgage company. Instead, he absconded with that money, having not 
accomplished a loan modification. Applicant learned of this late in October 2015, and 
since her home had already been foreclosed, she could not seek a loan modification.17  
 
Applicant submitted a series of emails documenting eight payments she made to 
the Advisor between December 2014 and July 2015 in amounts ranging from $500 to 
$2,175 (totaling $13,750), which she believed were for an escrow account to keep her 
current on her mortgage while awaiting a loan modification. The Advisor never returned t 
those payments. Applicant believes the Advisor defrauded her.18 Because her home was 
foreclosed upon, Applicant presented evidence that her mortgage company forgave the 
debt, thus showing the resolution of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g.19 Applicant considered 
filing a suit against the Advisor or joining a lawsuit already filed by one of her friends 
against the Advisor. Applicant consulted an attorney, who advised that she did not have 
a good case. Applicant was also concerned that a lawsuit might adversely affect her 
clearance.20 
 
Applicant blames her Advisor for failing to file and pay her state and federal income 
taxes, thus resulting in two tax liens being filed against her. Until she was audited, she 
was unaware that she owed back taxes. When she did learn, she retained an account to 
assist with putting payment plans in place.21 Applicant provided documentation showing 
installment agreements with the IRS in 2017. She also provided documentation that she 
                                                          
14 Tr. 53-55, 60-61.  
 
15 Tr. 55; AE B.   
 
16 AE H.   
 
17 Tr. 27-30, 68-69. Applicant repaid her two friends who raised the $9,800. Tr. 57.  
 
18 AE R; Tr. 56-58. Each payment included a $25 fee for her Advisor.  
 
19 AE N; Tr. 57.  
 
20 Tr. 67-73.  
 
21 Answer ¶¶ 1.e and f.  
5 
 
is adhering to those agreements.22 Applicant provided similar documentation of a 2016 
installment agreement with her state taxing authority and her adherence to that 
agreement.23 Applicant is also current with her tax filings.24 Applicant has successfully 
addressed her tax liabilities, thus resolving SOR ¶¶ 1.e and f. 
 
Applicant has attended credit counseling. It helped her with budgeting and using 
online tools to track spending. She makes about $100,000 annually and is doing well 
financially, paying everyone on time.25  
 
Applicant called three witnesses to attest to her good character and reliability. One 
witness was Applicant’s cousin and a former co-worker with the Government. The other 
two witness had known Applicant for 10 and 18 years, respectively. They all knew about 
Applicant’s financial problems.26 They characterized Applicant as “trustworthy,” “very 
honest,” and “very diligent.27 Applicant also submitted letters of recommendation. The 
authors knew her for from eight years to 25 years. They described Applicant as displaying 
a “a high level of trustworthy behavior and responsibility,” “very honest”, and 
“trustworthy.”28 The record establishes that Applicant is held in high esteem by her friends 
and the professionals with whom she has worked.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
                                                          
22  Tr. 58-59; AE K, O and P.  
 
23  Tr. 62-63; AE J.  
 
24 AE T and U.  
 
25 Tr. 59, 61-63. 
 
26 Tr. 24-25, 29, 41, 47, 49.  
 
27 Tr. 28, 43, 47. 
 
28 AE D.  
6 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has a number of delinquent debts, which 
purportedly raise a security concern under Guideline F. The financial considerations 
security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18, which in pertinent part, states: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  
 
 Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
7 
 
delinquent debt and other security-significant financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s 
self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.29 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f):   failure to file…annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g):    the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection process. Rather, an 
administrative judge examines the way an applicant handles his or her personal financial 
obligations to assess how they may handle their security obligations.30 Here, Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility was called into question by her past financial problems. I 
conclude that disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), (c) and (f) apply. The next inquiry is 
whether any mitigating conditions apply. 
                                                          
29 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
30 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
8 
 
 
At the time Applicant began having financial difficulties, she had a job with a 
demanding international travel schedule, a dying father, and bouts of depression.  Those 
factors contributed to her financial problems. Since those conditions were largely beyond 
Applicant’s control, the first part of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. The next inquiry, however, is 
whether Applicant acted responsibly in light those adverse circumstances.  
 
Sometime in 2012, Applicant retained a financial advisor, who had been 
recommended by associates of Applicant. The Advisor’s role was to handle financial 
matters (taxes, mortgage) on Applicant’s behalf during her frequent absences from the 
country. To that end, Applicant gave the Advisor her power of attorney. The Advisor was 
also tasked with negotiating a mortgage modification. The record shows no financial 
problems until sometime in 2014, prompting Applicant to direct the Advisor to file a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which he did in December 2014. That proceeding was, however, 
dismissed in April 2015, because it failed to meet the threshold for a Chapter 7. The filing 
of a Chapter 7 appears to be a responsible step under the circumstances, even if it 
ultimately failed to meet the threshold requirements, thus satisfying the second prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b).31 SOR ¶ 1.a is mitigated.   
 
Later in 2015, while Applicant was on travel, she was told by her Advisor that the 
mortgage company needed to be paid $9,800 to prevent a foreclosure. This no doubt 
surprised Applicant, because between December 2014 and July 2015 she had sent her  
Advisor eight payments totaling $13,750, which she believed were being deposited in an 
escrow account to make mortgage payments. Nevertheless, Applicant enlisted two 
friends to loan her the $9,800 and have it delivered to the Advisor, which they did.32 In 
late October 2015, Applicant learned that the Advisor never paid that amount to the 
mortgage company, nor had he negotiated a mortgage modification. Instead, he simply 
took the money and ran.33 As a result, Applicant’s home was foreclosed. In connection 
with the foreclosure the mortgage was forgiven, thus mitigating SOR ¶ 1.g. This episode 
fully satisfies AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b). 
 
Finally, Applicant learned only after a tax audit that the Advisor failed to file and 
pay her federal and state income taxes, resulting in two liens being filed against her. 
Applicant established at hearing that she has payment arrangements in place with the 
IRS and her home state and is current on those arrangements. SOR ¶¶ 1.e and f are 
mitigated under AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b) and (g).34  
                                                          
31 Applicant testified credibly at hearing that the three Chapter 13 filings were done by her advisor without 
her knowledge.  Therefore, SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1d. are mitigated by AG ¶ 20(a) (under such circumstances 
unlikely to recur). 
 
32 Applicant repaid her two friends.   
 
33 Applicant consulted a lawyer about suing the Advisor, but she was advised that she did not have a 
viable case.  
 
34 Applicant has received credit counseling, which has assisted her in managing her finances. And she 
now is current with all her creditors. I give her credit under AG ¶ 20(c).  
9 
 
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.35 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.   
 
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                          
35 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
