KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST:  Applicant had provided a list of witnesses and requested that, before the Judge
rendered a decision, “calls be place[d] to those that know me . . . I am confident that each will
vouch for my character.”  The Judge told Applicant that he would “not contact those people or
anyone else for that matter . . . If this makes a difference to you, you may change your mind and
request an in-person hearing.”.  Applicant did not request a hearing. We find nothing in the
Judge’s communications with Applicant that would have dissuaded a reasonable person from
requesting a hearing had he been inclined to do so.  We find nothing in them that would suggest
that the Judge would not consider Applicant’s character references or that they were not relevant. 
The Judge merely advised Applicant that it was not the Judge’s task to conduct an inquiry by
calling and interviewing witnesses, which is correct.  Judges do not call witnesses or otherwise
conduct investigations on behalf of either party to the proceeding.  To do so would be
inconsistent with the Judge’s role as an impartial fact-finder.   Applicant was not denied due
process.
CASENO: 16-02832.a1
DATE: 02/12/2018
DATE: February 12, 2018
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02832
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 31, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 18, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge failed properly to apply the whole-person concept.  Consistent with the following,
we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant’s SOR lists numerous delinquent medical debts, which are of relatively small
amounts.  It also lists a debt for nearly $11,000, which is a charged-off account resulting from an
automobile repossession.  Applicant advised that he had co-signed a loan with his niece, who
allowed the car to be repossessed after only a few months.  Although the creditor notified him of the
debt, Applicant did not pay it because he did not believe it was his responsibility to do so.  After
being notified that the statute of limitations had run for this debt, Applicant took no further action. 
The Judge found that there is no evidence in the record that this debt has been resolved.  Applicant’s
character references state that he is honest, trustworthy, and hardworking.  Applicant is involved in
a local youth sports league.
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s having under $2,000 in medical debts did not impair
his security eligibility.  However, he reached the opposite conclusion for the large automobile debt. 
The Judge noted that, as co-signer of the loan, Applicant had the same responsibility to pay as did
his niece and was obligated on the deficiency balance after the repossession sale.  He concluded that
Applicant’s refusal or unwillingness to satisfy this legal obligation shows that he failed to act
responsibly.  Though noting Applicant’s favorable evidence, he held that Applicant had failed to
meet his burden of persuasion in mitigating the concerns arising from the automobile debt.
Discussion
Applicant raises an issue of due process, citing to a series of communications he had with
the Judge.  The Judge advised that, based upon a reading of Applicant’s SOR response, he was
concerned that Applicant may have desired a hearing despite having requested a decision on the
2
written record.  The Judge advised Applicant that he himself would not get in contact with the
character references that Applicant had cited in his response but that if these references were
important to his case, Applicant could request a hearing.  Applicant contends that he surmised from
this that character references were not important and, accordingly, did not seek a hearing.  He
attributes his decision to a lack of experience in the DOHA process.
Applicant’s description of his communications with the Judge is generally accurate.  The
Judge noted Applicant’s SOR response.  Appellate Exhibit  I, Email from Judge to Applicant, dated
October 10, 2017.  In this response, Applicant had provided a list of witnesses and requested that,
before the Judge rendered a decision, “calls be place[d] to those that know me . . . I am confident
that each will vouch for my character.”  SOR Response at 2.  The Judge told Applicant that he would
“not contact those people or anyone else for that matter . . . If this makes a difference to you, you
may change your mind and request an in-person hearing.” Appellate Exhibit I.  As he notes in his
Appeal Brief, Applicant did not request a hearing. 
We find nothing in the Judge’s communications with Applicant that would have dissuaded
a reasonable person from requesting a hearing had he been inclined to do so.  In particular, we find
nothing in them that would suggest that the Judge would not consider Applicant’s character
references or that they were not relevant.  The Judge merely advised Applicant that it was not the
Judge’s task to conduct an inquiry by calling and interviewing witnesses, which is correct.  Judges
do not call witnesses or otherwise conduct investigations on behalf of either party to the proceeding. 
To do so would be inconsistent with the Judge’s role as an impartial fact-finder.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-05310 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2017).  Applicant was not denied due process.
Applicant contends that the Judge failed properly to apply the whole-person concept. He
states that it is unfair for the Judge to have focused on the one incident regarding the automobile
repossession to the exclusion of other evidence that shows Applicant to be trustworthy.  Applicant’s
argument is a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not enough to show
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No.15-07062 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 21, 2017).  Although the Judge made
findings about Applicant’s character evidence and addressed this matter in his analysis, his
conclusion was that Applicant’s failure to acknowledge responsibility for a loan that he co-signed
raised serious questions about Applicant’s judgment.  We find no reason to conclude that the Judge
failed to consider the evidence in its totality, as a whole-person analysis requires.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-03592 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 14, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3
Order 
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
