 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01719 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on January 18, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 6, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2009. He has an associate’s degree. He is twice married and 
divorced, with two adult children. 
 
 Applicant was a realtor in a part of the country where home prices rapidly 
increased before the real estate market collapse in the latter part of the 2000s. When 
the market collapsed, his income dropped significantly, as did the value of his home. He 
was unable to make a living as a realtor, and he was unable to pay his mortgage loan or 
sell his home. An environmental disaster in 2010 made it that much more difficult to sell 
his home. 
 
 The SOR alleges a $204,662 judgment, which is related to his foreclosure, and a 
$20,502 delinquent debt. Applicant acknowledges responsibility for the foreclosure and 
the delinquent debt. 
 
 Applicant took a relatively low-level job in 2009 because it was the only job he 
could find. He worked full-time for more than two years while in part-time status. As 
such, he received no significant benefits, such as health insurance. He paid what debts 
he could on his limited income. He received a certification in his field, and he has been 
working full-time, with benefits, for several years. 
 
 Applicant retained an attorney for $6,000 to assist him in negotiating with his 
creditors and to represent him at his hearing. The creditor for the $20,502 delinquent 
debt agreed to accept $6,000 in a lump-sum settlement of the debt, but Applicant could 
not afford that amount. The attorney returned $4,000 to Applicant and informed him that 
he was better off using the $4,000 to settle the debt and represent himself at his DOHA 
hearing. Applicant offered the $4,000 to the creditor, but it was rejected, and the creditor 
has been uncooperative in further negotiations. 
 
 It has been about nine years since the mortgage loan and the other debt became 
delinquent. Applicant lives modestly in a home that he and his siblings inherited. He 
owns his car outright. The $20,502 debt is no longer listed on his credit report, and his 
two most recent credit reports list no new debts with balances. Applicant remains willing 
to resolve any debt he legitimately owes if a fair arrangement can be made. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 The collapse of the real estate market made it impossible for Applicant to make a 
living as a realtor or to sell his house. An environmental disaster a few years later made 
it that much more difficult to sell his home. He took a relatively low-level job and paid 
what debts he could on his limited income. To his credit, he was able to keep his other 
accounts current. He has accrued no new debts. He failed in his attempt to settle one 
delinquent debt.  
 
Applicant does not present a perfect case in mitigation. Delinquent debts are a 
continuing concern until they are resolved. However, at some point, debts become old, 
unenforceable, charged off, fall off credit reports, and no longer of interest even to the 
creditors. He acted responsibly under the circumstances. His financial decisions do not 
reflect questionable reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are 
applicable.  
 
 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
