 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02692 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns raised by siblings and in-
laws who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. His brother is in the process of 
receiving his U.S. visa. His sister and in-laws prefer to live in Afghanistan. His past 
behavior demonstrates he can resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. His undivided allegiance to the United States is corroborated by his 
dependability and performance while under enemy fire and facing grievous harm. U.S. 
military officers who served with him in Afghanistan endorse his eligibility for a security 
clearance. Additionally, he has developed deep and long-lasting bonds in the United 
States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 7, 2014. 
Government investigators interviewed Applicant on July 15 and 22, 2014. After 
reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) on September 17, 2016, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). Applicant answered 
the SOR on October 10, 2016, and initially requested a decision based on the written 
 
2 
 
 
record. Applicant later requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on January 19, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing that same day, scheduling a hearing for January 26, 2017. At the hearing, the 
Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant objected to the 
admissibility of GE 2 (a summary of Applicant’s unauthenticated July 22, 2014 
interview). I sustained the objection. GE 2 was marked and made part of the record, but 
I did not consider it as evidence. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of his 
supervisor (an active duty Army lieutenant colonel), and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 
through 26. All of Applicant’s exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 3, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant requested an expedited hearing. At hearing, Applicant stated he had 
had sufficient time to prepare, was ready to proceed, and affirmatively waived his right 
to 15-days advanced notice of his hearing. (Tr. 15-18) 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. (GE 4) There were no objections, and I took administrative notice of facts 
concerning Afghanistan as noted in the decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e. He admitted the 
SOR factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. His admissions to the SOR and at his 
hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old linguist, translator, and consultant. He has worked for 
U.S. armed forces and federal contractors on and off since he was 16 years old. His 
periods of employment with federal contractors include: November 2003 through 
October 2008; December 2008 through February 2009; and April 2010 through 
December 2013. Applicant’s current employer and clearance sponsor hired him in June 
2014. Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Afghanistan. He attended an Afghan 
university for about two years, but did not complete a degree. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of one witness, submitted six 
reference letters, and twelve certificates of appreciation. The witness, a U.S. Army 
active duty lieutenant colonel (LTC F), supervised Applicant for about a year while 
deployed to Afghanistan. LTC F testified that Applicant has displayed total loyalty and 
dedication to the U.S. forces he has serve with in Afghanistan. Applicant served 
embedded with LTC F’s unit as well as with U.S. Special Forces units and teams 
performing missions all over the area of operations. Applicant is trusted with his 
 
3 
 
 
translations and was assigned as translator to important personnel and high ranking 
officers. LTC F recommended Applicant get a higher clearance so that he can be more 
valuable to the command. 
 
Applicant testified that between 2003 and 2014, he was involved in over 100 
dangerous missions where he and the U.S. Special Forces were under grave danger 
from enemy fire, ambushes, and improvised explosive devises. (Tr. 64-67) (LTC F’s 
testimony partially confirmed his testimony.) On one occasion, he suffered a broken leg. 
Additionally, Applicant and his family were in danger because of his work as a translator 
for U.S. forces. Local nationals threatened and pursued Applicant and his family and 
burned his car. Because of the open threat, Applicant’s one-star commander 
recommended Applicant for a special immigrant visa. In 2008, Applicant immigrated to 
the United States pursuant to a special immigrant visa issued to him because of his job 
as an interpreter for U.S. forces. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. 
 
Applicant’s references are from U.S. officers and noncommissioned officers who 
were members of teams deployed to Afghanistan. The gist of their testimony is that 
Applicant demonstrated exceptional skills and ability as an interpreter. He proved to be 
extremely valuable to the U.S. forces and gained the trust and confidence of his 
references. Most of the references endorsed Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. (AE 1-6) The twelve certificates of appreciation speak highly of Applicant’s 
outstanding performance, dedication, and professionalism, which contributed to the 
mission accomplishment of the U.S. forces. (AE 7-18) 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s parents, two brothers, and three sisters are 
residents and citizens of Afghanistan. It also alleged that Applicant provided financial 
support to his parents. Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States in 2014 and 
currently have permanent residency in the United States. (AE 21-22) Applicant’s father 
owns a home in Afghanistan that he plans to sell in the near future to purchase a home 
in the United States. Applicant no longer sends money to Afghanistan because his 
parents are living with his brother in the United States. Applicant has no financial or 
proprietary interests in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant’s wife and two children are naturalized U.S. citizens residing with 
Applicant in the United States. Applicant has two older brothers that are U.S. citizens 
living in the U.S. (AE 19-20) Two of Applicant’s sisters were granted visas and currently 
are residents of the United States. (AE 23-24) Applicant’s only close family members in 
Afghanistan are his younger brother (pending an interview to finalize the approval of his 
visa), and an older sister. His younger brother works for a U.S. contractor in the U.S. 
embassy in Afghanistan. He is pending the approval of his U.S. visa. His sister is 
happily married to an Afghan and they have six children. She does not plan to 
immigrate to the United States. 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law and one brother-in-law are still residents and citizens 
of Afghanistan. They have a lucrative family business and do not plan to immigrate to 
 
4 
 
 
the United States. His wife’s sister is a naturalized U.S. citizen, married to an American, 
and resides in the United States. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that neither he, nor his wife or children, intend to 
return to live in Afghanistan. He and his family are very happy to be living in the United 
States and they enjoy the peace and quality of life they have in the United States. 
Applicant stated: “it is my privilege to serve the U.S. forces . . . . this country gave me a 
lot . . . . my citizenship . . . . peace . . . . and safety for me and my family.” (Tr. 48) 
Applicant vowed to continue working for U.S. forces as much as he can. He is looking 
forward to helping soldiers in the ground. While working for U.S. forces in Afghanistan, 
Applicant came under weapons fire (mortar, rifle, rifle propelled grenades (RPGs)) 
numerous times, and was the victim of an improvised explosive device. Applicant 
credibly testified that he would resolve any possible conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Afghanistan. The 
State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of 
continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel 
to all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe due to the ongoing risk of kidnapping, 
hostage-taking, military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between 
political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct and indirect fire, suicide bombings and 
insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-borne or other improvised explosive 
devices (IEDs). Attacks may also target official Afghan and U.S. governmental convoys 
and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas. 
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of lraq 
and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISKP) and members of other armed opposition 
groups are active throughout the country. ISKP has shown its operational capability, 
having attacked both Afghan and foreign government facilities. The Taliban and its 
affiliates (the Haqqani Network) routinely conduct high profile attacks and 
assassinations against U.S., Coalition, and Afghan interests, particularly in Kabul and 
other key government centers, with little regard for civilian casualties.  
 
The border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan remains a safe haven for 
terrorists. It is an under-governed area that terrorists exploit to conduct attacks in both 
countries. Terrorist groups active in Afghanistan, such as al-Qa'ida (AQ) and others, 
operate in Afghanistan and Pakistan. ISIL-Khorasan (ISIL-K) is largely based in 
Afghanistan, but its support network also reaches into Pakistan's tribal areas along the 
border.  The Afghan government has struggled to assert control over this remote terrain 
where the population is largely detached from national institutions. 
 
Although al-Qa'ida's core leadership in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region 
has been degraded, elements continue to seek safe haven on both sides of the border 
to regenerate and conduct attack planning. The continued development of an al-Qa'ida 
affiliate in the region (al-Qa'ida in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)), highlights the 
 
5 
 
 
dynamic nature of the terrorist and militant landscape of the region, posing risks to the 
mission and to U.S. interests. 
 
The most significant human rights problems in Afghanistan during 2015 were 
widespread violence, armed insurgent groups' attacks on civilians and killing of persons 
affiliated with government, torture and abuse of detainees by government forces, 
widespread disregard for the rule of law, and little accountability for those who conduct 
human rights abuses, as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against 
women and girls. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
6 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.1 
 
 An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of 
that government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.2  
 
 The serious security threat posed by terrorists and other elements hostile to the 
United States operating within Afghanistan must be taken into account in assessing the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections and other interests in 
                                            
1 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (internal citation omitted).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge must 
consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
7 
 
 
Afghanistan Applicant’s relationship to these foreign relatives, coupled with the facts 
administratively noticed, raise a heightened security concern.  
 
 In assessing the security concern raised by Applicant’s foreign contacts and 
interests, I have considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”3 However, what 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
8 
 
 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.4  
 
 In the present case, Applicant has two siblings, parents-in-law, and a brother-in-
law who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. His brother is in the process of 
receiving his U.S. visa. His sister is happily married with six kids and prefers to live in 
Afghanistan. His in-laws have a profitable business and will continue to live in 
Afghanistan. All of Applicant’s remaining close family members (parents, siblings, wife, 
children, and his sister-in-law) live in the United States and they are not subject to 
possible foreign coercion or harm.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant has a long track record of resolving potential conflicts of 
interest raised by his relatives in Afghanistan and his fiduciary responsibilities in favor of 
U.S. interests. Since 2003 (at age 16), Applicant has worked for U.S. contractors and 
service members in Afghanistan assuming great risks and danger to him and his family. 
In the face of death threats to him and his family, and attacks on his property, Applicant 
faced down those threats and maintained his loyalty and fiduciary obligations to the 
United States.  
 
Applicant, with the encouragement of his family and his U.S. forces’ friends, 
remained loyal to the United States, reported the threats, and continued his work and 
responsibilities to the United States. Applicant immigrated to the United States because 
of the threats and attacks on him and his family in 2008. Notwithstanding, he has 
continued to serve the U.S. forces on other Afghanistan missions and would like to 
continue working for U.S. forces in the future.  
 
Applicant’s testimony that he would report any attempted coercion or threats, and 
that he would resolve any potential conflict in favor of the United States, is fully 
supported by his long and distinguished track record of doing so. His undivided 
allegiance to the United States is corroborated by his dependability and performance 
while under enemy fire and facing grievous harm. U.S. military officers who served with 
him in Afghanistan endorse his eligibility for a security clearance.5 Additionally, 
                                                                                                                                            
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 23, 2014). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (“Generally, an Applicant’s statements, by 
themselves, as to what he would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to 
little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the U.S. is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case. In this case, Applicant 
has served the U.S. military as a translator in dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan and has risked his 
life to protect American personnel there.) See also ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 
2006) (“As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior history of complying with 
security procedures and regulations significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct or 
circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in Guideline B 
cases, where the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with 
security procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has developed deep and long-lasting bonds in the United States, as 
evidenced by the reference letters and his witness’ testimony. Applicant’s past behavior 
demonstrates his ability to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States even under enemy fire and facing grievous harm.  
 
Accordingly, after a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, and 
while remaining mindful of my duty to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of 
protecting national security, I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his connections to and contact with his family in Afghanistan.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
U.S. forces in Afghanistan on and off since 2003 when he was 16 years old. He 
established an excellent reputation for his knowledge, cultural expertise, and linguistic 
abilities. He is considered to have exceptional skills and abilities as an interpreter. 
 
Moreover, Applicant is considered to be a highly-trusted employee, who is 
reliable, dependable, and a loyal American. He accompanied U.S. forces on numerous 
military missions where he risked his life and faced the enemy shoulder to shoulder with 
his U.S. forces’ companions and friends. His references, U.S. military personnel who 
served with him in Afghanistan, endorsed his eligibility for a security clearance without 
reservations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
                                                                                                                                            
which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national security. The presence of such 
circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.”) (internal citations omitted).  
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
