KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Hearing Judge found that Applicant falsified marijuana use and a related arrest on
security clearance applications. The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a
satisfactory explanation for the decision. New evidence regarding medical marijuana use
provided at appeal was not considered and was without merit. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00258.a1
DATE: 02/23/2018
DATE: February 23, 2018
In Re:
------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00258
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 30, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision – security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of DoD Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On December 29, 2016, the SOR was amended.  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 14, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s unfavorable
decision.
In his analysis, the Judge summarized his pertinent findings as follows:
Applicant frequently used marijuana from 1999 to 2003, and in May 2007, he used
marijuana at a party.  At the party, he drank four beers and two shots of vodka.  The
police stopped him after the party.  He was charged with possession of drug
paraphernalia, driving while impaired, and some other offenses.  His breathalyzer
was below the threshold for driving while intoxicated.  He subsequently pleaded
guilty to possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while impaired.  On his March
15, 2004 SCA [security clearance application], he falsely denied EVER using
marijuana in the past seven years.  On his October 21, 2014 SCA, he falsely denied
EVER using marijuana while holding a security clearance, and he falsely denied that
he was EVER arrested for a drug-related offense.  His assertion that he thought the
questions on his 2014 SCA only sought information for the pervious seven years is
not credible.  He took the time to ask coworkers for their opinions about the
question, showing he read the question carefully and considered whether he should
lie.  He intentionally and deliberately falsified his 2004 and 2014 SCAs.1  
In his appeal brief, Applicant submitted letters of reference and other documents that he did
not previously submit to the Judge for consideration.  Those documents constitute new evidence that
the Appeal Board cannot consider on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant raises factual and legal concerns about his 2007 arrest.  As the Judge correctly
found, Applicant pled guilty to the charges of possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while
impaired arising from that arrest.  Tr. at 30.   The record contains substantial evidence to support the
Judge’s material finding regarding the arrest and conviction.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0897 at
2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 1997). 
Applicant argues that he used marijuana in 2007 to deal with chronic pain arising from
sports-related injuries.2  He also argues that, even though he made a poor decision by not disclosing
1 Decision at 7.
2 In his brief, Applicant stated:
I realize marijuana continues to be my preferred medication and over the past two months I have taken
the necessary steps to be registered and approved for use of medical marijuana from the [applicable
state commission].  My Patient ID Number is . . . and I have enclosed my certificate with care provider
to this appeal. [Appeal Brief at 2].
This explanation and the medical marijuana certificate also constitutes new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot
consider.  It merits noting, however, that, while several states have decriminalized marijuana or allowed its use for
medical or recreational purposes, such use of marijuana remains subject to the applicable disqualifying conditions in the
his marijuana use in his 2004 SCA, he has proven his suitability for national security eligibility
because he has held a security clearance for 13 years without incident.  To the extent that he is
arguing the Judge did not consider record evidence or mis-weighted the evidence, he failed to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record and failed to establish
the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-00844 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2017).  
Applicant further contends that he did not falsify his 2004 SCA by failing to disclose a minor
in possession of alcohol charge.  In the amendment to the SOR, the allegation addressing
Applicant’s failure to disclose that charge was deleted.  Additionally, Applicant asserts that denial
of his security clearance will have an adverse impact on him.  The Directive, however, do not permit
us to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13180 at 3 (App.
Bd. Aug. 21, 2013).  
Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  The
Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b): “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”
Directive.  See, e.g., Directive, Encl 2, App A ¶ 25(b), “any substance misuse. . . .”  The use of medical marijuana was
addressed in a memorandum issued by the Directive of National Intelligence, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting
Marijuana Use, dated October 25, 2014, which states in part:
[N]o state can authorize violations of Federal law, including the Controlled Substance Act . . . which 
identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled drug.  Moreover, [the Intelligence Reform and
Terrorism Prevention Act, as amended, 50 U.S.C. § 3343 (2008)] specifically prohibits a federal
agency from granting or renewing a clearance to an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an
addict, and under federal law, use of marijuana remains unlawful.
* * *
Agencies continue to be prohibited from granting or renewing a security clearance to an unlawful
user of a controlled substance, which includes marijuana.
   
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Judge Michael Ra’anan
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Judge Charles C. Hale
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Judge James F. Duffy
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
