 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02586 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
02/22/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has not mitigated 
concerns raised by his unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative 
determination. On October 30, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the 
Government’s written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM), which 
contained six Items. Applicant received the FORM on November 21, 2017. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old, graduated from high school and attended college 
courses. He obtained an associate’s degree in 2005. Applicant served on active duty 
with the U.S. Navy from 1998 to 2004, and inactive reserves until 2006, receiving an 
honorable discharge. He never married and has no children. He has been employed as 
a system administrator with his current employer since 2016. (Item 1) He attended 
college classes from 2006 until 2013, but he did not obtain a degree.  He admits and his 
credit report shows 11 student loans in collection totaling approximately $48,814, and 
other collection accounts for a total of $1,722. (Item 4) Applicant’s explanation for his 
delinquent debt is unemployment since 2014, despite actively seeking employment. 
(Item 2) He has not provided any documentary evidence to reflect that he has taken 
steps or has a plan to resolve his delinquent debts. He held a security clearance while 
in the military. Applicant completed his security clearance application in August 2016. 
(Item 3)  
 
 Applicant’s explanation for his financial difficulties is his lack of sufficient income 
since 2014. He lives with his parents and does not pay rent. He plans to aggressively 
tackle his debt with employment earnings as soon as possible. During his 2017 
investigative interview, he stated that he is sponsored by the current employer but is not 
getting paid yet. (Item 6) He stated that he did not receive unemployment benefits and 
has used savings to support himself during the time that he attended college classes.  
His last full time employment was from 2005 until 2008. Applicant reported that he 
became delinquent in 2012. He also believes that some of the SOR allegations of 
student loans are duplicates.  He also stated that he would begin making monthly 
payments on his delinquent debts as soon as he receives steady paychecks. (Item 6) 
He stated that he has always lived within his means and has no criminal record. His 
credit report shows that from 2007 until 2012, he paid his accounts as agreed. (Item 5) 
 
  Applicant provided no information concerning any efforts or plans to resolve the 
issues with a collection company to address his delinquent debts. He did not report any 
financial counseling. He intends to pay the delinquent debts, but he did not have a 
definite plan. He chose not to file bankruptcy. He did not respond to the FORM to 
supplement the record. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to meet one’s financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.2 Applicant’s 
admissions and the credit reports establish the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he has an 
inability to do so.3 Applicant presented no evidence to mitigate the concerns about his 
plans to resolve the issues by working with a collection company, but he intends to pay 
his debts. He chose not to file bankruptcy. A promise to pay in the future is not enough 
to mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and 
caused in part by events beyond his control. He has not shown by this record that he 
has acted responsibly. None of the mitigating conditions apply. AG 20(a)- 20(d) 
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render him unsuitable for  
access to classified information at this time. He did not provide any information to show 
good-faith efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial stability 
necessary to reapply for national security eligibility in the future.  The award of a 
security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. While a favorable 
decision is not warranted at this time, he may present persuasive evidence of financial 
rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ (18). 
 
3 AG ¶¶ 19(a),(c). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
