 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02307 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 13, 2015. On July 
31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guidelines G and J. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, (December 10, 2016), for all 
adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
 
 2
on September 21, 2017. On September 22, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence.1 He 
received the FORM on October 1, 2017, and he submitted three documents, which have 
been admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A, B, and C. The case was assigned to me on 
January 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old graphic designer employed since February 2015 by a 
contractor providing services for another government agency.3 He received a DOD 
security clearance in January 1997, but his application for a public trust position was 
denied by another government agency in 2013, because he had been terminated from a 
job for being underqualified and working at home without permission. 
 
 Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 1989 and a bachelor’s degree in 1994. 
He married in December 2003 and divorced in January 2005. He began cohabiting with 
his future second wife in June 2013. They married in May 2016 and divorced after less 
than a year of marriage. He has an adult son who was born in 1990. 
 
 On December 20, 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI) (first offense), refusal to take a blood or breath tests, and running a stop 
sign. In January 2017, he was convicted of DWI and sentenced to 30 days in jail 
(suspended), fined $250 plus court costs, and placed on unsupervised probation for three 
years. His driver’s license was suspended for 12 months. The other charges were 
disposed of by nolle prosequi. (Item 4.) During a security interview in February 2017, 
Applicant admitted that he was belligerent toward the officer who stopped him and refused 
to take a breathalyzer test. He explained that he was upset because he had been 
“fighting” with his wife. (Item 6 at 5.)  
 
                                                          
1 The FORM included Item 6, a summary of a personal subject interviews (PSI) conducted on February 15 
and March 27, 2017. The PSI summaries were not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI 
summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant responded to the FORM and submitted additional 
evidence, but he did not comment on the accuracy or completeness of the PSI summaries, nor did he object 
to them. I conclude that he waived any objections to the PSI summaries. Although pro se applicants are 
not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their 
rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 By mutual agreement, DOD adjudicates applications for security clearances for other government 
agencies pursuant to Directive ¶ 2.2.  
 
 3
 On March 30, 2017, three days after a follow-up telephonic interview with a security 
investigator, Applicant was charged with public swearing and intoxication. In May 2017, 
he was convicted and fined $25 plus court costs. (Item 5.) The record contains no 
information about the circumstances of this arrest and conviction. 
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol in college at social events on weekends. He stopped 
consuming alcohol on a date not reflected in the record and had not consumed alcohol 
for several years before his DWI arrest in December 2016. (Item 6 at 7.) He used 
marijuana about 24 times and heroin 3-4 times in January to March 1999, when he was 
involved with a girlfriend who was a recovering drug addict. He held a DOD security 
clearance at the time. He received counseling for drug use, but the record does not reflect 
any details about the counseling. (Item 6 at 6-7.)4 
 
 Applicant attributed his excessive drinking in December 2016 and March 2017 to 
a “difficult separation” from his second wife, whom he recently divorced. He began 
attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings in June 2017 and has a sponsor. He has 
not consumed alcohol since June 15, 2017. He entered an alcohol safety action program 
(ASAP) in August 2017, and the intake clinician recommended that he complete the AA 
12-step program, attend weekly community support groups, and obtain weekly individual 
therapy. (FORM Response at 4.)  
 
Applicant began seeing a therapist in October 2016 for “couples therapy” and 
relationship distress. He self-referred to the same therapist after his alcohol-related arrest 
in March 2017. In October 2017, his therapist diagnosed him with “alcohol use disorder, 
moderate, in early remission.” The therapist’s prognosis was “excellent.” (FORM 
Response at 3.) 
 
Applicant’s AA sponsor submitted a letter stating, “Compared to others I have seen 
in early sobriety, [Applicant] is earnest, thorough, and honest.” (Item 2 at 4.) Applicant’s 
immediate supervisor submitted a letter urging reinstatement of his clearance because of 
his valuable contributions to the agency. (FORM Response at 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s drug use while holding a security clearance was not alleged in the SOR and may not be an 
independent basis for denying his application for a security clearance. However, conduct not alleged in the 
SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative 
guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person 
analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the evidence of 
Applicant’s drug use for these limited purposes. 
 
 
 4
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in March 2017 for public intoxication 
and swearing and that he was convicted and fined $25 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that 
he was arrested in December 2016 and charged with DWI, refusing a blood or breath 
test, and running a stop sign; and that, in January 2017, he was convicted of DWI, 
sentenced to 30 days in jail (suspended), fined $250, and placed on unsupervised 
probation for three years. (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed 
clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(c): the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment 
program, has no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress in a treatment program. 
 
 6
 AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related misconduct 
was less than a year ago. He will be on unsupervised probation until January 2020. His 
conduct was not “infrequent” and did not occur under circumstances making recurrence 
unlikely.  
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his conduct, 
voluntarily sought counseling, and is participating in AA. However, insufficient time has 
passed to establish a “clear and established” pattern of abstinence. His therapist 
described him as “in early remission,” and his AA sponsor described him as “in early 
sobriety.” 
 
 AG ¶ 23(c) is established. Applicant has not previously received counseling for 
alcohol abuse. He has received counseling for drug abuse, and has not relapsed. His 
therapist believes that he is making satisfactory progress and gave him an “excellent” 
prognosis. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the Guideline G conduct listed above under this guideline 
(SOR ¶ 2.a). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.” Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM 
establish the following potentially disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(c): individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
 
 7
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Insufficient time has passed to 
demonstrate successful rehabilitation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline G and J in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult, and he is taking positive steps to prevent 
recurrence of his alcohol-related conduct. On the other hand, he has a history of troubled 
relationships that resulted in substance abuse, and insufficient time has passed to 
demonstrate rehabilitation. Because he requested a determination on the record without 
a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and J, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Use):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
