 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00894 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on June 7 2017, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on July 14, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 4, 2017. As of 
September 18, 2017, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
December 19, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2010. He attended college for a period without earning a 
degree. He married in 1996 and divorced in 2010. He has two minor children.1 
  
 Applicant had a failed business in about 2008. He was unemployed from about 
December 2009 through April 2010. He pays $1,846 in monthly child support. He was 
unable to pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent. He did not file his 
2013 state income tax return, and he did not pay all his federal taxes for several tax 
years.2 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $53,000; about $11,500 owed in 
federal taxes for tax years 2013 through 2015; and that Applicant failed to file his 2013 
state income tax return. The six delinquent debts are each listed on at least one credit 
report.3 
 
 Applicant paid the $585 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in February 2017. He admitted 
having collection accounts with the remaining five delinquent debts, but he disputed 
them, and they are not listed on his most recent credit report. He admitted owing the 
IRS for tax years 2013 through 2015. He stated, without supporting documentation, that 
he has a payment plan with the IRS and his income tax refund was withheld to pay his 
back taxes. He admitted in his response to the SOR that he had not filed his 2013 state 
income tax return. He stated that he “must have forgotten to submit [it].” He stated that 
he would “go and remedy this immediately.” No additional information was submitted.4 
 
 Applicant paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR. His current credit report 
does not list any delinquent accounts. In September 2016, he took out a $78,461 
vehicle loan, payable in $1,108 monthly payments for 84 months. He received credit 
counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 Items 1, 4-6. 
 
4 Items 1, 3-6. 
 
5 Items 3-6. 
 
 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts and 
unpaid taxes. He did not file his 2013 state income tax return. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a failed business, unemployment, 
and his divorce. However, his tax issues were not beyond his control, because they 
occurred after he started his current job in 2010. Moreover, there is no evidence that he 
has filed his 2013 state income tax return. Failure to comply with tax laws suggests that 
an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules and 
systems. Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for protecting 
classified information. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, 
such as paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of judgment and 
reliability required of those granted access to classified information. See e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 15-05478 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
 Applicant paid the $585 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in February 2017, and he paid 
other debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He admitted having collection accounts 
with the remaining five delinquent debts, but he disputed them, and they are not listed 
on his most recent credit report. It is possible, but unlikely, that Applicant paid the debts. 
I am nonetheless crediting him with mitigating the non-tax debts.  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the IRS for tax years 2013 through 2015. He stated, 
without supporting documentation, that he has a payment plan with the IRS and his 
income tax refund was withheld to pay his back taxes. I suspect that may be true, but he 
did not document any payments. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a 
Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific 
debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)). 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
taxes. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
 
6 
 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(g) is not applicable 
because Applicant did not document that he is in compliance with an installment 
agreement with the IRS. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h:   For Applicant  
 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
