 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-02371 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated; however, drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns are not mitigated. Applicant repeatedly used 
marijuana while holding a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On August 26, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1. On August 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; and 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs). Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement and substance misuse) and E (personal conduct).  
 
 
2                                         
 
On September 13, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR and requested 
a hearing. HE 3. On October 24, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On 
October 26, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On November 7, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for November 28, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits; Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Transcript (Tr.) 15-17; GE 1-4. Applicant’s clarification of the summary in the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) that he was not 
aware of how the marijuana was delivered to a band practice is accepted as fact. Tr. 17-
18; GE 4. On December 5, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations. HE 3. He also 
provided mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old director for an entity providing services, and his current 
employer has employed him since 2002. Tr. 7-9; GE 1. In 1987, he graduated from high 
school. Tr. 7. In 1990, he received a bachelor’s degree in history. Tr. 7. He has not served 
in the U.S. armed forces. Tr. 7. In 1991, he married, and his children are 17 and 18. Tr. 
8. He has held a security clearance for more than ten years, and there is no evidence of 
security violations. 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges, and he admitted, that he used marijuana from about June 
2012 to about June 2015 (¶¶ 1.a and 2.a), and he has held a security clearance since 
December 2006 (¶¶ 1.b and 2.a). Tr. 20; SOR response.  
 
In Section 23 of Applicant’s August 26, 2016 SCA, Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug 
Activity, he disclosed “[o]ccasional use of marijuana (less than ten times per year over a 
2-3 year period)” from June 2012 to June 2015. GE 1. He said, “I do not INTEND to use 
in the future but I also do not consider occasional use of marijuana to be ethically any 
different than occasional use of alcohol, so I do not have any strong thoughts about future 
use.” GE 1 (emphasis in original). His employer does not test employees for illegal drug 
use. Tr. 20.  
 
Applicant used marijuana at band practices when friends were using marijuana. 
Tr. 20. He estimated he used marijuana a total of about ten times. Tr. 24. Sometimes he 
drove after using marijuana. Tr. 27. His children are unaware of his marijuana use. Tr. 27. 
 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3                                         
 
Applicant ended his involvement with the band about 30 months ago. Tr. 27. He 
has never had marijuana in his home or vehicle. Tr. 28. He continues to associate with 
friends who used marijuana two or three years ago. Tr. 22. He was around people who 
used marijuana at a social gathering in early 2017. Tr. 23. He said possession of 
marijuana is a misdemeanor, “equivalent of a parking ticket” or moving violation. Tr. 24. 
It is illegal, but “there are degrees of legality.” Tr. 24. Possession of marijuana is a 
misdemeanor-level crime in his state. Tr. 28. He assured marijuana use was not an 
important part of his life, and he did not intend to use marijuana in the future. Tr. 25. He 
emphasized that he viewed marijuana use as inappropriate because of the impact on his 
security clearance; however, he viewed it as a “relatively minor infraction.” Tr. 26.2 He did 
not possess or view classified information during the period when he was using 
marijuana, and his marijuana use was infrequent. Tr. 26. In his SOR response, Applicant 
acknowledged that “any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national 
security eligibility.”  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges that Applicant engaged in the same conduct under the 
personal conduct guideline as alleged under the drug involvement and substance misuse 
guideline in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
Applicant describes himself as an honest and trustworthy person. (Tr. 29) He has 
never been charged with a crime. Tr. 29. He did not provide any character references or 
statements or employer performance evaluations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
                                            
2 Under the state law where Applicant committed the marijuana possession and use offenses, 
possession or use of marijuana is a “minor misdemeanor.” See Ohio Revised Code § 2925.11(B)(3)(a).  
 
4                                         
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement and substance 
misuse: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
 
5                                         
 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition)”; “(c) illegal 
possession of a controlled substance . . .”; and “(f) any illegal drug use while granted 
access to classified information or holding a sensitive position.” Applicant possessed and 
used marijuana.3 His illegal drug possession and use occurred when he possessed a 
security clearance. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(f) are established.  
 
Applicant noted that his state has reduced the criminal offense of marijuana 
possession to a minor misdemeanor. On October 25, 2014, the DNI addressed changes 
in state law legalizing marijuana possession and use. The DNI indicated marijuana 
possession continues to violate federal law, and he explained the security ramifications 
of marijuana possession as follows: 
 
An individual’s disregard of federal law pertaining to the use, sale, or 
manufacture of marijuana remains adjudicatively relevant in national 
security determinations. As always, adjudicative authorities are expected to 
evaluate claimed or developed use of, or involvement with, marijuana using 
the current adjudicative criteria. The adjudicative authority must determine 
if the use of, or involvement with, marijuana raises questions about the 
individual’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to comply 
with law, rules, and regulations, including federal laws, when making 
eligibility decisions of persons proposed for, or occupying, sensitive national 
security positions. 
 
DNI Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana 
Use, October 25, 2014. 
 
AG ¶ 26 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
                                            
 3 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 
21 U.S.C. § 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement 
Administration listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also e.g., 
Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6                                         
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. From June 2012 to June 2015, 
Applicant used marijuana about ten times at band practices when friends were using 
marijuana. Sometimes he drove after using marijuana. His illegal marijuana possession 
and use occurred while he held a security clearance, although he did not possess or view 
classified documents from June 2012 to June 2015.   
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence 
of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform 
or rehabilitation.”4 
                                            
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, 
 
7                                         
 
In his SOR response, Applicant provided a clear resolution not to use marijuana in 
the future. He recognized the adverse impact of drug abuse in connection with access to 
classified information. He also understands that possession of marijuana violates state 
and federal laws and constitutes criminal conduct. I accept Applicant’s statement that he 
intends to continue to abstain from illegal drug possession and use as truthful. AG ¶ 26(a) 
partially applies to his possession and use of illegal drugs.5  
    
AG ¶¶ 26(b), 26(c), and 26(d) are not fully applicable. AG ¶ 26(b) does not fully 
apply. He provided “a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for 
revocation of national security eligibility.” However, he was unclear whether his 
associations with marijuana users have ended. He did not complete a drug counseling or 
treatment program. Applicant somewhat minimized the seriousness of his illegal 
marijuana possession and use, equating it to a traffic infraction or consumption of alcohol.   
Applicant has made important rehabilitative steps; however, more time without illegal drug 
possession and use is necessary to fully mitigate drug involvement and substance misuse 
security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
                                            
and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage of 
three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the 
administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of law, 
the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply that 
mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR Case 
No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a rational 
basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at alcohol 
rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the administrative 
judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency analysis of an 
administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
5 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. In ISCR Case 
No. 14-00775 (App. Bd. July 2, 2015), the Appeal Board sustained the revocation of a security clearance 
for an Applicant, who did not hold a security clearance that used marijuana 20 months before the 
administrative judge decided the case. 
 
8                                         
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or 
group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
All of Applicant’s conduct causing a security concern in SOR ¶ 2.a is explicitly 
covered under Guideline H, and that conduct is sufficient to warrant revocation of his 
security clearance under Guideline H. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. Applicant’s 
involvement with illegal drugs affects his professional and community standing. However, 
this conduct does not create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because security officials are aware of it. AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. Guidelines H and 
E address identical issues involving judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Guideline 
E concerns constitute a duplication of the concerns under Guideline H, and accordingly, 
personal conduct security concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a are found for Applicant. 
 
  
 
9                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines H and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old director for an entity providing services, and his current 
employer has employed him since 2002. In 1990, he received a bachelor’s degree in 
history. He did not provide performance evaluations or character statements describing 
his trustworthiness and reliability. He has held a security clearance for more than ten 
years, and there is no evidence of security violations.  
 
The evidence against granting Applicant access to classified information is more 
substantial. His illegal drug use was extensive. From June 2012 to June 2015, Applicant 
used marijuana about ten times at band practices when friends were using marijuana. 
Sometimes he drove after using marijuana. His illegal marijuana possession and use 
occurred while he held a security clearance, although he did not possess or view 
classified documents from June 2012 to June 2015. His illegal drug possession and use 
raise unresolved “questions about [his] reliability and trustworthiness, both because such 
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about [his] ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
See AG ¶ 24.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement and 
substance misuse concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With continued abstention from illegal drug 
possession and use, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he 
 
10                                         
 
may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal conduct 
security concerns are mitigated; however, drug involvement and substance misuse 
security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
