 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00318 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests. He did not mitigate the resulting 
alcohol consumption concerns, but did mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On January 13, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On April 10, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after September 
 
 
 
 
2 
1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions 
issued after that date. 1 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 4, 2017 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 22, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on August 24, 2017, setting the hearing for September 20, 2017. Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified, called 
two witnesses, and offered Exhibits (AE) A and B into evidence. All exhibits were 
admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in 2008 
and earned a bachelor’s degree in 2015. He started working for a defense contractor in 
2016. Prior to this position, he worked at various jobs and attended college. (Tr. 15-18) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he has been arrested three times for charges involving 
alcohol consumption, as alleged in the SOR. In November 2010, he was arrested and 
charged with consumption of liquor/minor, a misdemeanor. Applicant was driving and was 
stopped by the police, he was given a field sobriety test and then taken to a police station. 
He took a breathalyzer. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was 0.11, which was over the 
legal limit. He paid a $155 fine and took a driver’s education class. He was placed on 
court supervision for 90 days.2 (GE 5) This arrest occurred four days before his 21st 
birthday. He was drinking beer with a college friend a few miles from home. He admitted 
that he made a bad decision to drive that night and did not fully appreciate the 
consequences his behavior could have on his future. (Tr. 24-26; GE 4) He resumed 
consuming alcohol after his supervision ended. (Tr. 27-28) 
 
 In October 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI), a misdemeanor. That evening he drove a friend home from a party where 
Applicant had consumed four drinks. He was driving erratically when a policeman stopped 
him. His breathalyzer indicated a BAC of 0.08. He was placed on two years of supervised 
probation and ordered to pay a $2,000 fine. He was ordered to undergo level 3 alcohol 
treatment and to complete 20 hours of classes. After this arrest, he began realizing the 
implications of his actions and became vigilant about not drinking and driving. (Tr. 28-31; 
GE 2, GE 5)  
 
 In May 2016, Applicant was arrested by the police and charged with DUI, a 
misdemeanor. He had consumed 9 or 10 drinks over a 10-hour period. While driving home 
                                            
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 Applicant mistakenly testified that he was placed on probation for a year, fined $1,500, and had his driver’s 
license suspended after this charge. The police record documents the resolution as set forth in the Decision. 
(GE 5) 
 
 
 
 
3 
he swerved to miss an animal and ran into a ditch. He managed to pull his wrecked car 
out of the ditch. At some point, the police saw him walking at 3 a.m., looking for a car part. 
He failed a field sobriety test and refused a breathalyzer. He told his supervisor about the 
incident within the week it happened. These charges were pending at the time of this 
hearing. His driving privileges had not been suspended as of this hearing. (Tr. 31-36; GE 
2) He admitted that he stopped being vigilant about driving after consuming alcohol. (Tr. 
44) 
 
 After his last arrest in May 2016, Applicant voluntarily participated in a DUI Risk 
education class. The course involved 10 hours of assessing one’s risk of alcohol abuse 
and 10 hours of group therapy. He was diagnosed as a social drinker on the course’s risk 
scale. The course ended in September 2016. He has not participated in any subsequent 
treatment or been evaluated by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional for 
an alcohol use disorder. (Tr. 20-22)   
 
 Applicant testified credibly and felt embarrassed by his behavior. The last time he 
drank alcohol was the weekend before this hearing. He consumed five beers over seven 
hours while with friends. He spent the night at his friend’s house. He acknowledged he 
felt intoxicated that night. He generally drinks beer once a week, over the weekend. (Tr. 
19-20, 35-36, 45) His family and friends are aware of the alcohol charges. (Tr. 59-60) 
 
 Two witnesses testified for Applicant. One of his employers, an Air Force veteran, 
said that Applicant has been productive and collaborative in his work. He noted that all of 
his performance evaluations have been exceptional. He has no reservations about 
Applicant holding a security clearance. Applicant’s technical lead for the past three years 
complimented Applicant on his work performance and reliability. He has never observed 
Applicant exhibit impaired behavior. He supports his request for a security clearance. (Tr. 
46-59)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following two may potentially apply:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
 
 
 
5 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was arrested three times for crimes involving alcohol consumption and 
driving a vehicle. In 2010, he was convicted of consuming alcohol as a minor. In 2011, he 
was convicted of a DUI. Both times, he was inebriated, and over the legal limit for driving. 
The third charge, a 2016 DUI, is pending. The evidence established the above three 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Within a six-year period, Applicant was charged three times with crimes involving 
alcohol and driving. Not enough time has passed since the last offense in 2016, nor has 
any of the conduct occurred under unusual conditions. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
Applicant acknowledged his problems with alcohol and driving, but he has not provided 
sufficient evidence of steps he has taken to prevent similar incidents. Despite his claim to 
be more vigilant after his second arrest, he failed to do so. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
There is no evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 23(c) and (d). Although he 
participated in an alcohol assessment and a court-ordered alcohol awareness program, 
he has not participated in counseling or a treatment program as prescribed in the 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 16 contains no disqualifying condition that would support 
security concerns in this case that are independent of those comprehensively addressed 
under Guideline G. The SOR merely re-alleges by reference the allegations raised under 
those guidelines. While any conduct involving questionable judgment or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can theoretically fall under Guideline E, as well as other 
guidelines, no value is added to the analysis of Applicant’s national security eligibility by 
doing so in this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent, candid 
and honest adult, who is successfully performing for his employer. He understands that 
he is accountable for the decisions that underlie his history of criminal conduct and the 
resulting security concerns. Although he appreciated the consequences of a DUI after his 
2011 arrest, he failed to take sufficient precautions to prevent another incident. He has 
not participated in alcohol counseling or treatment as articulated in the mitigating 
conditions. At this time, the final disposition of his last criminal offense is unknown. Given 
that, and Applicant’s honest admission that he consumed alcohol to the point of 
 
 
 
 
7 
inebriation the week before this hearing, there is insufficient evidence to mitigate the 
alcohol consumption security concerns or my doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:            FOR APPLICANT (Duplicative)3 
 
       Subparagraph 2.a:                                For Applicant (Duplicative) 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                            
3 Paragraph 3 is duplicative of Paragraphs 1 and 2. It supports no separate findings of security concern.  
 
