 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-01507 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 22, 
2015. On May 25, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines H, E, and F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (by counsel) on July 24, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on 
October 25, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on October 27, 2017. On 
November 15, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
 
2 
 
Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 5, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Applicant was not represented by counsel at the hearing.1 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through S and U through BB, which were admitted into evidence without objection.2 At 
the hearing, Applicant’s request to leave the record open until December 19, 2017 was 
granted. Following an extension, the record closed on January 18, 2018. Applicant 
timely provided additional documents that were admitted into evidence as AX CC 
through MM, without objection.3 Applicant’s two exhibit lists were appended to the 
record as HE II (original) and III (post-hearing). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 20, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.4 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.5 However, I have also considered the September 2006 AG because 
they were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact6 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He married his wife in July 2016, and had his first child 
in December 2017. He completed high school after only 3 years in 2006. He earned an 
associate in engineering science degree with honors in 2016, and plans to pursue his 
bachelor’s degree in early 2018. He worked part time for his current defense contractor 
employer from March 2016 through August 2016, when he was hired full time. This is 
his first application for a security clearance.7  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7-8. 
 
2 A through S and U through W were submitted as attachments to his SOR answer. Despite the reference 
to it on Applicant’s Exhibit List, AE T was not including among those attachments. Applicant was advised 
that AE T was missing from the record and that the record would be left open so that he could submit it 
after the hearing. Tr. at 23. 
 
3 AX JJ is the document listed as AX T on HE II. 
 
4 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
5 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
6 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR Answer and his SCA (GE 1). 
 
7 AX B, C, D, Z; Tr. at 8-9, 33-36, 65, 73. 
 
3 
 
Guidelines H and E 
 
 Applicant suffered a neck injury during a motorcycle accident in June 2006, a 
month after his mother passed away. He was prescribed narcotics for the pain. 
Eventually, he began misusing the prescribed narcotics and abusing other drugs, 
including cocaine, marijuana, and heroin, to which he became addicted. He used at 
least one of these drugs (whatever he could obtain) almost daily and with such 
frequency that he was unable to provide specific dates or occasions. At times, he also 
purchased unprescribed narcotics and other illegal drugs. Applicant explained that he 
used drugs not only to numb the physical pain from the accident, but also the emotional 
pain from his mother’s death. He did not use any drugs while in a court-ordered drug 
treatment program from September 2010 through September 2011, and his last drug 
use was in September 2013.8 
 
 Between 2009 and 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal 
possession of a controlled substance five times. The drugs involved were: heroin in 
December 2009, September 2010, April 2013, and August 2013; and heroin and 
cocaine in August 2010. 
 
 The court ordered Applicant to complete a drug treatment program in connection 
with the 2009 and two 2010 charges. He began the program, which included six weeks 
of inpatient treatment followed by a direct transition to a halfway house and intensive 
outpatient treatment, in September 2010. Upon his successful completion of the 
program in September 2011, the court dismissed all three charges. 
 
Following his April 2013 arrest, Applicant pled guilty and, while he awaited 
sentencing, was arrested again in August 2013. He also pled guilty to the second 
charge. For both charges, the court sentenced him to 36 months of supervised 
probation. He was released from supervision early and successfully completed the 
terms of his probation in January 2015.9  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant’s employer terminated him from his retail job for 
misuse of company funds. Between November 2012 and February 2013, Applicant 
knowingly participated in a fraudulent return scheme in order to obtain money to 
purchase unprescribed narcotics and other illegal drugs. In lieu of pursuing criminal 
charges, his employer agreed to accept restitution payments, in small increments, of the 
$350 that Applicant received from the scheme. He completed the payments in March 
2016.10 
  
Applicant voluntarily participated in a three-month residential substance abuse 
program through his church from September 2013 through December 2013, which 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8 Tr. at 81. 
 
9 AX G. 
 
10 AX V; Tr. at 71-72. 
 
4 
 
involved mentoring, counseling, group therapy, and spiritual guidance. Immediately 
following his successful completion of that program, he continued vocational training 
and additional group therapy with another similar church program through August 2014. 
Since then, Applicant has not participated in any substance abuse-specific programs. 
He draws support for his sobriety from his family and church community. He believes 
that a relapse would cause him to lose their respect and trust, which would be 
impossible to regain. He attends a bible study twice a week.11  
 
In 2015, Applicant was prescribed narcotics for pain stemming from a botched 
dental procedure. He immediately gave the medication to his wife and advised her to 
administer it to him only if needed and as prescribed. He never took any of the 
medication because he never needed it. He anticipates that he will be having more 
dental work done in the near future. He plans to handle any prescribed medication 
similarly. He has advised his primary care physician of his past addiction and will advise 
the oral surgeon as well.12 
 
Applicant relocated from City A to City B in order to disassociate himself from the 
environment and people involved with his drug abuse. He no longer associates with 
anyone presently using illegal drugs. He met his wife after he stopped using drugs. She 
is aware of his prior addiction.13 
 
 Applicant submitted a signed sworn statement declaring, under penalty of 
perjury, that he has no future intent to use any illegal controlled substance or abuse 
prescription drugs. He also stipulated to random drug testing and to the immediate and 
unqualified revocation of his security clearance in the event of any future positive drug 
test.14   
 
 A licensed clinical social worker, who is also a certified substance abuse 
counselor and substance abuse professional, evaluated Applicant in July 2017. She 
confirmed that the substance abuse program in which Applicant participated with his 
church is an accepted approach to treatment for substance dependence. She described 
Applicant’s drug involvement as a classic example of opiate addiction arising from an 
injury. She assessed Applicant to be in complete remission, opined that he was not at 
risk for relapse, and specified that no treatment was warranted.15 
 
 The SOR cross-alleged, under Guidelines H and E, Applicant’s purchase and 
use of unprescribed narcotics and other illegal drugs (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e/2.a), misuse of 
prescribed narcotics (SOR ¶¶ 1.e/2.a), five drug-related arrests (SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.h, 1.k, 
1.l/2.a), and drug treatment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.m). Applicant admitted to all but two of 
                                                          
11 AX H; Tr. at 26-28; 38-39, 56-57, 80-81. 
 
12 Tr. at 81-87. 
 
13 Tr. at 36-37. 
 
14 AX I. 
 
15 AX J and K. 
 
5 
 
the Guideline H allegations. As to those two, he admitted in part and denied in part with 
explanation. He admitted the Guideline E allegation. 
 
Guideline F and E 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts, totaling $11,069 (SOR 
¶¶ 3.a – 3.l), and Applicant’s 2013 employment termination and associated $350 
restitution (SOR ¶ 3.m). It also crossed-alleged SOR ¶ 3.m under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 
2.a). In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted to all but one of the Guideline F allegations. 
He successfully disputed the one debt that he denied, SOR ¶ 3.j/Sprint, $255, on the 
basis that it was an employee cell phone account that was not his responsibility to 
pay.16  
 
Applicant attributed the accumulation of his delinquent debts to the period of his 
drug addiction. He explained that his drug addiction led him to make a number of poor 
financial choices, including the fraud underlying his termination. His debts also included 
medical bills related to his 2006 accident.17 
 
Applicant had resolved all of his delinquent debts before the hearing, albeit most 
after the issuance of the SOR. He had not resolved them sooner because he was not 
financially able until he became gainfully employed in 2016, and because he was 
following the advice of a debt consolidation company. In 2015, that company advised 
him not to pay his delinquent debts because the statute of limitations for collecting it 
was soon to expire. After consulting with an attorney to prepare his response to the 
SOR, he learned that he had received bad advice.18  
 
In December 2017, Applicant took out a $5,000 loan, which he used to pay off 
the balances of his high-interest credit cards. They were not delinquent at the time.19 
Applicant has a net monthly remainder of approximately $2,800, has not incurred any 
new delinquent debt, and is presently managing his finances responsibly.20 
 
Whole Person 
 
 Applicant reported his misuse of prescribed narcotics, purchase and use of 
unprescribed narcotics and other illegal drugs, arrests, and financial debts on his 2015 
security clearance application and discussed them fully during his 2016 security 
clearance interview. Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He 
                                                          
16 AE JJ; Tr. at 29. 
  
17 Tr. at 28. 
 
18 Tr. at 29, 40-56, 57-71. 
 
19 AX DD through HH; Tr. at 74-78. 
 
20 AX W, GE 5; Tr. at 50-54. 
 
 
6 
 
acknowledged and accepted full responsibility for his substance misuse and related 
issues. 
 
Applicant excelled academically while attaining his associate degree. In 2014, he 
was recognized by his college for the significant time he spent volunteering with the 
college’s peer tutoring program.21  
 
Applicant regularly attends his church and donates significant time and money in 
support of its various programs and charities. In 2016, Applicant spoke at a 2,000-
person rally alongside others, including the local police chief, to advocate for his 
church’s substance abuse program and to attest to how the program changed his life. In 
2017, he joined a local community organization to share his addiction, treatment, and 
recovery story in order to help others overcome their own struggles with addiction.22 
 
Seven people (five friends who are members of his church – one of whom is also 
a work colleague, the senior pastor of his church – who also ministered the substance 
abuse program, and a reverend of his church – who is also the director of the substance 
abuse program) praised Applicant’s character and trustworthiness, and corroborated his 
sobriety. A work colleague of one year lauded Applicant’s character and work 
performance. Each of these references was aware of the Government’s SOR concerns. 
Applicant has received several awards from his current employer, who described him as 
an “extremely valuable and exceptional employee.”23 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”24 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”25 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
                                                          
21 AX B through E; Tr. at 29. 
  
22 AX F, H, X, AA; Tr. at 31-33. 
 
23 AX A, F, H, BB; Tr. at 30-31, 33. 
  
24 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
25 Egan at 527. 
 
26 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
7 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”27 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
  
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.28 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”29 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.30 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.31 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.32 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”33 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”34 
 
                                                          
27 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
28 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
29 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
30 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
31 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
32 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
33 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
34 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
“The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.”  
 
Applicant’s misuse of prescribed narcotics, purchase and use of unprescribed 
narcotics and other illegal drugs, and his drug-related arrests, during the period 2006 
through 2013, establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:35 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility;  
 
                                                          
35 The SOR allegations concerning Applicant’s drug treatment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.m) do not establish any 
disqualifying conditions under Guideline H and E. If anything, they support mitigation. 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 26(c): abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. 
 
Applicant acknowledged and accepted full responsibility for his substance 
misuse, during the hearing, throughout the security clearance investigation process, and 
with respect to the legal consequences associated with his arrests. Applicant 
successfully completed a drug treatment program in 2013 and has not used drugs in 
over four years.  
 
Since Applicant’s last drug use, he became gainfully employed, got married, and 
had a child. He relocated to a new city in order to distance himself from the environment 
where he used drugs and the persons with whom he used drugs. He no longer 
associates with anyone presently using illegal drugs. On the future occasion that 
Applicant might be prescribed necessary pain medication, he has developed a use plan 
that he successfully followed in 2015.  
 
Applicant received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional 
who assessed him to be in complete remission from substance dependency and not at 
risk for relapse. She described Applicant’s drug involvement as a classic example of 
opiate addiction arising from an injury.  
 
Applicant acknowledged the incompatibility of drug use with his maintenance of a 
security clearance, and agreed that it would be revoked if he resumed any drug use. 
Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible during the hearing. His witnesses 
corroborated the substantially changed behaviors and circumstances underlying 
Applicant’s past substance misuse. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant’s substance 
misuse is not likely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
 
10 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts, totaling $11,069, and his 2013 employment 
termination and associated $350 restitution establish three disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices 
such as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant incurred his delinquent debts under circumstances not likely to recur. 
He resolved them before his hearing and is managing his current finances responsibly. I 
conclude that his finances are under control, not likely to recur, and do not cast doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline, as set out in AG ¶ 15, includes:  
 
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
11 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.”  
 
Applicant’s misuse of prescribed narcotics, purchase and use of unprescribed 
narcotics and other illegal drugs, and drug-related arrests, during the period 2006 
through 2013, together with his 2013 termination and associated restitution, establish 
the following disqualifying condition under this guideline:36 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
They also establish the general concerns involving questionable judgment and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Incorporating my comments under 
Guideline H and F, I conclude that Applicant’s past drug use and related issues do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, E, and F in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, E, and F, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his past substance misuse and associated personal 
conduct and financial considerations issues. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried 
                                                          
36 The SOR allegations concerning Applicant’s drug treatment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.m) do not establish any 
disqualifying conditions under Guideline H and E. If anything, they support mitigation. 
 
12 
 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse): FOR 
APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
