 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01137 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. Applicant responded to the SOR on May 30, 2017, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on June 22, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on July 17, 2017. As of 
September 15, 2017, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
December 19, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 2001 
until he was honorably discharged in 2005. He has an associate’s degree, which was 
awarded in 2014, and additional college credits. He has never married and has no 
children.1 
  
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related offenses. He received nonjudicial 
punishment in the military for reporting for duty on two occasions after drinking alcohol. 
He was under the legal drinking age at the time. He was required to attend alcohol 
classes. He was charged with drinking in public in 2006. He decided to sleep in his truck 
outside a bar rather than drive home after he had been drinking. He was convicted of 
the charge and received a fine.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) in May 
2012. He drove a company truck home from a bar and scratched a neighbor’s car. The 
neighbor called the police. Applicant pleaded nolo contendere. His sentence included 
probation for one year, a suspended driver’s license for 6 months, an interlock ignition 
device placed on his car for 18 months, and alcohol education classes. He was 
terminated from his job.3 
 
 Applicant was charged with drinking in public and obstructing governmental 
operations in December 2014. He was drinking with a professor after graduating from 
community college. Applicant was a passenger in a car with the professor, who was 
involved in a minor one-car accident on railroad tracks. Applicant refused to have his 
picture taken as part of his processing. He pleaded guilty to drinking in public, and the 
obstructing governmental operations charge was dismissed. He was fined $195.4 
 
 Applicant stated that he had no excuses for his DUI and that he should not have 
been driving. He noted that “two of the instances were rather unusual and don’t reflect 
[his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He stated that since his last 
incident, he has maintained responsible use of alcohol. He is continuing his education in 
pursuit of a bachelor’s degree.5 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 4. 
 
2 Items 1-4. 
 
3 Items 1, 2, 4, 6. 
 
4 Items 1, 4, 5. 
 
5 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing 
the welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
Applicant had two alcohol-related offenses in the military for reporting for duty 
after drinking alcohol. He had three more offenses between 2006 and 2014. AG ¶¶ 
22(a) and 22(c) are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s DUI happened in a company truck and involved a minor accident 
with a neighbor’s car. Applicant was not driving in his most recent incident, but he was a 
passenger in a car where the driver had been drinking and was also involved in an 
accident. It has been more than three years since the last offense, and Applicant stated 
that he has maintained responsible use of alcohol. He chose to have his case decided 
on the written record vice a hearing. There is simply not enough evidence in the FORM 
and his response for me to conclude that irresponsible alcohol use is in his past. None 
of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to overcome concerns about his alcohol use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
