 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01804 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns arising from two 
large delinquent debts. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On June 23, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F: Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 24, 2017 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me on August 24, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing that same 
day, setting the hearing for September 19, 2017. Department Counsel offered 
 
 
 
 
2 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. Applicant testified, and offered 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 3 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 27, 2017. The record remained 
open until October 24, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE 4 through AE 9, and they are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She has been married for 27 years. She has three adult 
step-children. Applicant has a master’s degree in computer information management. 
She has worked for her current employer since 2003. (Tr. 18-22) She has held top secret 
and secret security clearances since 1991. (Tr. 8)  
   
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from August 2017, January 2017, and May 
2016, the SOR contained two allegations: a past due amount of $9,793 owed on the 
balance of a $163,843 mortgage, as of May 2016; and a charged-off automobile loan debt 
in the amount of $24,899, as of April 2016. (GE 3, GE 4, GE 5) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in December 2015 and continued 
accumulating until mid- 2016, during which time she was traveling for her job and incurring 
additional expenses not reimbursed. She also began helping her father financially. In May 
2016, she had knee surgery and was unable to work for a couple months after the surgery. 
She received some disability payments, but not enough to cover expenses. She gave her 
father about $5,000 and lost about $5,000 of income during this period. (Tr. 28-30) 
  
 In March 2017, Applicant entered into a loan modification for her mortgage (SOR 
¶ 1.a). As of April 2017, her new monthly payment is $1,241. The loan amount is 
$170,273, and includes the previously delinquent amount of $9,793. She has been 
making monthly payments since April 2017. The debt is being resolved. (Tr. 26-31; GE 3; 
AE 2) She negotiated the loan modification prior to the issuance of the SOR. 
 
 Applicant failed to make about five payments on her car loan in 2016, during the 
same period she was unable to pay her mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b). She has made five or six 
monthly payments of $650 to catch up on the debt, beginning in July 2017. Her budget 
includes payments on this debt. (Tr. 31; GE 3; AE 7) She thinks the balance is about 
$22,500. (Tr. 37) She negotiated the payment plan shortly after the SOR issued. 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $123,000. Her husband retired in 2004 and no longer 
works. He receives $16,000 annually in social security payments. They filed their federal 
and state tax returns for the past five years. They owe the IRS about $3,000 for unpaid 
taxes for 2016 and are on a payment plan. They established a written budget. She has 
not taken financial or credit counseling. (Tr. 23-24) Her most recent performance 
evaluation noted that she “consistently exceeded expectations, with a high measurable 
impact and exceptional results.” (AE 6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Three may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The two large SOR-alleged debts became delinquent in 2016, at which time 
Applicant was unable or unwilling to resolve them. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. The following may 
potentially apply:  
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The two debts arose during a period when Applicant was traveling for her job, 
financially helping her father, and recovering from surgery without sufficient income. The 
evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), as those circumstances are unlikely to 
recur and do not cast doubt on her current trustworthiness and reliability. While the 
decision to financially assist her father was within her control, the other circumstances 
involving her job and health were circumstances beyond her control. Applicant did not 
provide information that she attempted to responsibly manage the debts while they were 
becoming delinquent, which is required to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant did not submit evidence that she participated in financial or credit 
counseling; however, there are indications that the two debts are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies. Applicant initiated an effort to resolve her mortgage prior to the 
issuance of the SOR; she started resolving her car loan shortly after the SOR issued. She 
is adhering to the payment plans that she negotiated with the creditors, and is 
demonstrating good-faith efforts to resolve her debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 
 
 
 
 
6 
woman, who has successfully worked for defense contractors for a long time. Between 
2015 and 2016, she encountered financial difficulties which she was initially unable to 
manage. She has since resolved both debts through a mortgage modification and 
payments on a delinquent automobile loan. Her budget accommodates those payments.  
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases, stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates 
that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) 
(‘Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.1 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate a plan to implement and 
resolve outstanding delinquent debts. The likelihood that financial problems will recur or 
Applicant will stop making payments on the plans she initiated is minimal based on her 
efforts to-date and knowledge that similar problems could jeopardize her employment. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She met 
her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:                For Applicant 
 
                                            
1 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
