 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-00630 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline Guideline B 
(foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, revising the 2006 AGs. The revised AG apply to all 
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision on the 
newly effective AG. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 10, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on August 25, 2017. Applicant received 
the FORM on September 6, 2017, and had 30 days to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded on September 29, 2017, by providing a 
15-page-typed statement plus attachments including copies of his two certificates of 
appreciation and three character reference letters including one from the Director of 
Security at his employer. His response was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and it 
was admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s documents, identified 
as Items 1 through 8, were also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on January 17, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request to take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Lebanon. Item 8. The request and attached source documents were 
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning Lebanon.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE I source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The facts 
are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts gleaned from HE 1. 
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy. Syria borders on Lebanon and 
influences Lebanon’s foreign and internal domestic policies. Syria has been engaged in 
an internal conflict for many years and millions of refugees have left Syria and settled in 
camps in neighboring countries. The U.S. State Department has declared the Syrian 
Government to be a supporter of terrorism. The United States seeks to maintain its 
 
3 
 
traditionally close ties with Lebanon. Lebanon has some serious human rights 
problems.  
 
Hezbollah is a radical Shia group, which operates in Lebanon and Palestine and 
receives support from Iran. It is a U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organization. The 
Lebanese Government recognizes Hezbollah as a legitimate group. The Islamic State of 
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Nusra Front (ANF), Hamas, and the Abdullah Azzam 
Brigades (AAB) operate in Lebanon, and ISIL and ANF have claimed responsibility for 
suicide bombings in Lebanon.  
 
Americans have been the targets of terrorist attacks in Lebanon, and the 
perpetrators of some of those attacks are still present in Lebanon and retain the ability 
to commit further acts of terrorism. U.S. government employees in Beirut are required to 
live under strict security because of the dangers of terrorism. Groups hostile to the 
Lebanese Government and the United States operate largely autonomously inside 
refugee camps in different areas of Lebanon. The U.S. State Department continues to 
urge Americans to avoid travel to Lebanon.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He was born in Lebanon and moved to the United 
States (U.S.) in 1982. He attended high school from 1984 to 1987, but did not get a 
diploma. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 1991 at Los Angeles, CA. He lost his 
Lebanese passport a long time ago and he has been self-employed as the owner of a 
security company since May 2012. Applicant is also pending employment as a linguist 
and cultural advisor since October 2015, depending on obtaining his security clearance. 
He reports a previous security clearance from 2000, with no issues.                     
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 2000 to 2003 and received an 
honorable discharge. Then, he supported U.S. forces in Iraq as a linguist from 2003 to 
2005 and 2007 to 2011. He was unemployed from April 2011 to May 2012. Applicant 
was married in 2000 and divorced in 2003. He remarried in October 2005 in Lebanon 
and reports two children, ages three and eleven.   
 
         Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SCA) on 
October 21, 2015.2 In section 18 of his SCA, he disclosed his spouse, his brother, and 
his in-laws, who are citizens and residents of the Lebanon. His spouse is a dual citizen 
of the U.S. and Lebanon. His in-laws are elderly and have never had any affiliation with 
the Lebanese government. They have never asked Applicant what he does for work and 
Applicant has very little contact with them. He last saw his brother at his father’s funeral 
in Lebanon in September 2012. He has infrequent telephonic contact only annually with 
his brother. They last spoke by phone in September 2011. His brother has no affiliation 
with the Lebanese government. Applicant has been married over 13 years, and his wife 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated October 21, 2015 (Item 4) and the summary of his clearance interview by 
a clearance investigator on August 15, 2016, and December 23, 2016 follow-up interview. (Item 7) 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
4 
 
supported him through several deployments to work as a linguist in combat zones. She 
is a homemaker and resides with Applicant. She has no affiliation with the Lebanese 
government or security. He also disclosed his foreign travel in his SCA including 
multiple trips to Qatar and Lebanon.  
 
         Applicant responded to the FORM on September 29, 2017, by providing a 15-
page-typed statement plus attachments including copies of his two certificates of 
appreciation and three character reference letters including one from the Director of 
Security at his employer, and another from a senior U.S. Army Officer. All attest to his 
work ethic, loyalty to the U.S. and trustworthiness. His director of security references 
Applicant’s numerous awards and decorations from his active duty in the U.S. Army, 
and as a linguist.  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(c) failure to report or fully disclose, when required, association with a 
foreign person, group, government, or country; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
 
6 
 
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s brother and in-laws are citizens and residents of the Lebanon. 
Extremist groups and terrorism plague Lebanon. It is contiguous to Syria and accepts 
scores of refugees from that war-torn neighbor. Lebanon is unstable and rife with 
human rights abuses. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a potential conflict of 
interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
 
7 
 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.3  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1982. He became a U.S. citizen in 1991. 
He is married and has been employed supporting U.S. forces in war zones for over 15 
years. He served in the U.S. Army and he appears to be a solid citizen. He has 
longstanding relationships and loyalties here as evidenced by his character reference 
letters. Although he has relatives in Lebanon, which is an unstable environment, his 
contact with them is de minimis. He continues to have only fleeting, occasional contact 
with his family members in Lebanon. There is no indication that they are affiliated with 
the Lebanese government or intelligence services. Applicant is committed to his new life 
here. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are applicable to Lebanese family members contacts, 
which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c. Because Applicant’s ties to Lebanon are minimal 
and inconsequential, I find that all foreign influence concerns have been mitigated.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline.  
 
Applicant served as a U.S. linguist, translator, or cultural advisor for over five 
years in Iraq. Applicant provided character references and certificates for his service in 
a designated combat zone. He made contributions to the U.S. military at personal risk. 
He is willing to continue to serve in Southwest Asia as a linguist. All of these 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report 
any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit 
him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable 
service as a linguist weighs heavily towards approval of his security clearance. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb 5, 2008). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
