 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00790 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On June 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
established by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4) (December 10, 
2016), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
 
2 
                                      
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated July 25, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on September 1, 2017, and he was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive. Applicant received the FORM on 
September 11, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on October 11, 2017. Applicant 
chose not to submit any response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 
26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments two of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as a 
merchant seaman with his employer since August 1996. He received a General 
Educational Development (GED) diploma in 1997. Applicant has never served in the U.S. 
military. He was granted a secret security clearance at some point in his career, but he 
does not recall when it was granted. Applicant was married in 1992 and divorced in 1999. 
He has two children, born in 1991 and 1993.  
 
Financial Considerations1 
Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems, starting in 1999, which he 
attributed to “misguidance and lack of tax knowledge regarding state tax liability as a 
mariner”, and because he was a “victim of false and deceptive advertising whereas [a tax 
resolution company] did not resolve [Applicant’s] tax debt as advertised and has never 
returned money paid for services not rendered.”2 He said that when he first started his 
job, he was advised by coworkers that if he was aboard a ship for six months he did not 
have to pay state income taxes. In around 2008, he began to receive letters from various 
states regarding taxes he purportedly owed. At some point in 2010 or 2011, he contacted 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 2 (e-QIP, dated October 26, 2015); Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 25, 2016); Item 1 
(Answer to the SOR, dated July 25, 2017); Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated 
November 14, 2015); and Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 15, 2017). 
 
2 Item 1, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
a company specializing in tax issues, and he sought the company’s assistance in 
resolving his tax problems.  The company was to help him file back taxes and set up 
repayment plans. He paid the company $4,000. While awaiting a consolidation plan, he 
was advised that the money was only the cost of the start-up process. The company took 
no further action on Applicant’s behalf. Twelve months later, what Applicant characterized 
as “a class-action lawsuit” was filed against the company.3 Applicant failed to submit any 
documents to support his contentions that he had a business relationship with the 
company or that he had made any payments to it. 
 In October 2016, Applicant informed an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) that he was trying to obtain a home equity loan to enable 
him to pay off his tax bills, and he hoped to be able to have repayment plans in place or 
have the bills paid by February 2017. He also noted that for the past four years, one half 
of his federal income tax refunds were automatically applied to the delinquent state taxes. 
He anticipated that the amount would be increased to the entire federal refund.4 In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant repeated his assertion that he had applied for a home 
equity loan. He failed to submit any documentation, such as correspondence or an 
application for a home equity loan, or statements regarding state tax payments or federal 
tax refunds, to support his contentions. 
The SOR identified two state tax liens and four allegedly delinquent accounts that 
had been placed for collection or charged off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s 
November 2015 credit report or his February 2017 credit report. Those debts total 
approximately $26,341. The current status of those six debts, according to the credit 
reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s 
comments regarding same, is as follows: 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): a state tax lien entered against him in 2011 in the amount of 
$16,183.5 In the absence of documentation described above, I must conclude that the 
lien has not been resolved.  
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): a state tax lien entered against him in 2012 in the amount of $7,566.6 
In the absence of documentation described above, I must conclude that the lien has not 
been resolved. 
                                                          
3 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9. In fact, one state attorney general obtained a settlement order with the company 
requiring a lengthy list of new business practices in order for the company to continue to do business, and a substantial 
fund was to be distributed to former customers. Another state attorney general soon followed up with a nearly 
$200,000,000 judgment against the company for deceptive business practices. Shortly thereafter, the company filed 
for bankruptcy. See https://texasattorneygeneral.gov/oagnews/release.php?id=4020 
 
4 Item 3, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
5 Item 4, supra note 1, at 5; Item 5, supra note 1, at 3; Item 6 ([State] Judgment and Lien Filings, undated). 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 1, at 5; Item 5, supra note 1, at 3; Item 6 ([State] Judgment and Lien Filings, undated). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): a bank credit card with a $2,000 credit limit and an unpaid balance 
of $1,579, of which $628 was past due. An unspecified amount was charged off.7 On April 
19, 2017, Applicant settled the account with a payment of $394.78, and the collection 
agent considered the account closed with a zero balance.8 The account has been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): an automobile loan with a high credit of $16,718 and an unpaid and 
past-due balance of $482 that was charged off in December 2014.9 Applicant contended 
the vehicle was stolen and considered a total loss in 2009, and that the insurance 
company paid off the remainder of the loan. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant said he 
was in the process of disputing the debt with the credit bureaus because “proof of this 
debt has never been presented to [him] in writing.”10 Applicant failed to submit any 
documentation, such as a police report, insurance documents, letters between Applicant 
and the creditor, or copies of the disputes, to support his contentions. In the absence of 
those documents, I have concluded that the account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): a furniture store account with an unpaid balance of $472. During his 
OPM interview, Applicant claimed he had never missed a payment and had no idea why 
there was a delinquent balance. In his Answer to the SOR, he said he was in the process 
of disputing the debt with the credit bureaus because “proof of this debt has never been 
presented to [him] in writing.”11 Applicant failed to submit any documentation, such as an 
account statement, letters between Applicant and the creditor, canceled checks, or copies 
of the disputes, to support his contentions. In the absence of those documents, I have 
concluded that the account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): a medical account with an unpaid balance of $59.12 Applicant paid 
the creditor $59 on August 22, 2016,13 ten months before the SOR was issued. The 
account has been resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. There is no evidence of a budget or any financial counseling. Applicant failed 
to prove that his financial situation is now under control.  
  
                                                          
7 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6; Item 5, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
8 Letter, dated April 19, 2017, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
  
9 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
10 Item 1, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
11 Item 1, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
12 Item 4, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
13 Single Patient Ledger, dated July 21, 2017, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”14 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”15   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”16 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.17  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
14 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
15 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
16 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”18  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”19 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
                                                          
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. In addition, AG ¶ 19(f) may apply for “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required.” Applicant failed to timely file his state income tax returns for a 
multi-year period, as required. As a result, he incurred indebtedness and tax liens (filed 
in 2011 and 2012) to two different states totaling approximately $23,749. Other delinquent 
debts brought the entire total to $26,341. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”20 Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”21 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.” Under AG ¶ 20(g), it is potentially mitigating if “the individual has 
made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and 
is in compliance with those arrangements.” 
                                                          
20 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s ongoing, 
unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the 
Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-
01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
21 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
since at least 2011, when the first tax lien was filed, or before, make it difficult to conclude 
that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to recur.” 
Applicant acknowledged that he was following some inaccurate tax advice from fellow 
mariners, and he failed to file his state income tax returns as required. He is credited with 
resolving two rather minor accounts, but any additional resolution efforts associated with 
his state taxes and other accounts simply because “proof of this debt has never been 
presented to [him] in writing,” does not reflect any efforts on his behalf to resolve those 
accounts since he learned of them. While Applicant referred to engaging a company to 
assist him with his taxes, since becoming disenchanted with their performance, it appears 
that he simply took no further action with respect to the liens. As for the remaining unpaid 
debts, claims of action, without documentation to support the claims, are not persuasive. 
There is insufficient evidence to show that Applicant has recently attempted to address 
his state tax liens.  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is 
there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be paid first. Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct in furtherance of the plan may provide for the payment of 
such debts one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without further 
confirmed action, are insufficient. 
 
There is little evidence of an ongoing good-faith effort by Applicant to contact the 
two state revenue departments to resolve Applicant’s tax liens.22 There is little evidence 
that the conditions that may have resulted in the financial issues between 2011 and the 
present were largely beyond Applicant=s control. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling, a budget, or any disputes. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his 
financial situation is now under control. Equally as important, there is no evidence that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that failure to do so continues 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.23 
                                                          
22 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
23 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.24   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 46-year-old 
merchant seaman who has worked for his employer since August 1996. He contended 
that he made efforts to resolve his debts, either by engaging professional assistance to 
do so, or by filing disputes, and he managed to resolve two relatively minor debts.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. Applicant failed to timely file his state income tax returns over a lengthy multi-
year period, and in 2011 and 2012, two states filed tax liens against him. Although he 
claimed to have tried to resolve those two liens, aside from his comments, he failed to 
submit any documentation to reflect actions purportedly taken by the company or by him. 
In October 2016, Applicant said he was trying to obtain a home equity loan to enable him 
to pay off his tax bills, and he hoped to be able to have repayment plans in place or have 
the bills paid by February 2017. He also noted that for the past four years, one half of his 
federal income tax refunds were automatically applied to the delinquent state taxes. He 
anticipated that the amount would be increased to the entire federal refund. In his Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant repeated his assertion that he had applied for a home equity loan. 
He failed to submit any documentation, such as correspondence or an application for a 
home equity loan, or statements regarding state tax payments or federal tax refunds, to 
support his contentions. There is no documentary evidence of disputes having been filed. 
Considering Applicant’s multiple failures to resolve his state tax liens from 2011 
and 2012, or the accounts which he claimed he was disputing, the lack of documentary 
                                                          
24 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
evidence regarding his current finances, and the absence of character evidence regarding 
Applicant’s honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness, I am unable to reach a positive 
conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:25 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a poor track record of debt reduction and elimination 
efforts. He failed to fulfill his promises to take timely corrective actions. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, 
App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:    For Applicant 
                                                          
25 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
