 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald Payne, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 16, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 
27, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 17, 2018. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
There were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into 
evidence. I held the record open until February 7, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents, which he did. They were marked AE B through D. There was no 
objection, and they were admitted into evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript 
on January 24, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit I, a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are supported 
by source documents from official U.S. Government publications.2 The facts are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. He denied 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He completed high school 
and attended college for one year, and did not earn a degree. He served his mandatory 
conscription in the Afghan military from 1989 to 1990. He was a clerk. He married in 1997 
in Afghanistan. He has four children from the marriage, ages 18, 16, 12, and 10 years 
old. Applicant has been employed by his present employer, a federal contractor, since 
October 2016.3  
 
 In 2007, Applicant applied for a Special Immigration Visa. He moved to the United 
States in 2008 and became a naturalized citizen in 2013. Applicant’s wife, mother, and 
four children are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. They live in a village near the 
Pakistan border. Applicant has been providing between $600 and $1,200 a month for his 
mother, wife and children’s daily needs. He began sending the money to his father in 
approximately 2008 to support both of his parents and Applicant’s wife and children. His 
father passed away in 2016. He now sends the money to his brother to support their 
mother and Applicant’s wife and children. He explained that it would be unusual for a 
woman to go to the bank in Afghanistan. All of his children attend school in Afghanistan. 
He speaks with his mother once or twice a week. She does not work. His wife is a 
homemaker. He talks to her once or twice a week. He last visited his family in Afghanistan 
in June 2016. His wife has applied to the U.S. Government for a visa to move to the United 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit II is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 Tr. 21-23. 
 
3 
 
 
States. Applicant stated it is being processed. Applicant talks to family and children on 
the phone, through the Internet, and on social media.4 
 
 Applicant has seven sisters. One sister is a British citizen residing in London. 
Another sister is a citizen of Holland, residing in London. A third sister is a permanent 
resident of the United States. Her husband was a linguist and she immigrated to the 
United States. The remaining four sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. They 
are all homemakers and live in the same village as Applicant’s wife and children. He has 
varying contact with them, sometimes once every two, three, or six months depending on 
when he speaks with his children and if they are nearby. He does not provide financial 
support to his sisters. Two have husbands who are taxi drivers. One’s husband is 
deceased, and another is a storeowner. Applicant’s speaks to his sisters’ husbands 
occasionally.5  
 
 Applicant has three brothers. One is a pharmacist, who is a citizen of Afghanistan 
and lives in the same family compound where Applicant’s family lives. He looks after 
Applicant’s family. It is this brother whom Applicant sends money to support Applicant’s 
family. He talks with his brother at various time. His second brother lives in the United 
States and is a permanent resident. His third brother is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan serving as an Army officer in the Afghan military. Applicant speaks with this 
brother about every five to six months. His brother is aware that Applicant works for U.S. 
forces, but he stated his brother does not know the details of Applicant’s work.6   
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan and live close to Applicant’s 
family compound in Afghanistan where his wife and children live. Neither of them work. 
Applicant last spoke with them about seven months ago. He has infrequent contact with 
them, but it if they are present when he contacts his wife or children, he will talk with them. 
Their sons support them. Applicant testified that his parents-in-law are unaware of the 
type of work he does.7  
 
Applicant has supported U.S. forces in Afghanistan since 2005 at various times. In 
his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-QIP) he disclosed he worked 
as a linguist in Afghanistan for federal contractors from March 2005 to September 2006; 
February 2007 to April 2008; March 2010 to April 2011; and September 2011 to 
November 2012. He lived and worked in the United States when not in Afghanistan doing 
various jobs. When he returned to Afghanistan in March 2010 he voluntarily resigned in 
April 2011, so he could be with his family for five months from April 2011 to September 
2011. He has been working in Afghanistan since beginning work in October 2016 with his 
                                                          
4 Tr.24-29, 57, 61. 
 
5 Tr. 29-35, 39. 
 
6 Tr. 33-35, 58. 
 
7 Tr. 35-36. 
 
4 
 
 
present employer. He was not permitted to visit his family while working in Afghanistan 
for federal contractors. 8 
 
While in the U.S. Applicant stays in a hotel. He does not own property in the U.S. 
and does not rent an apartment while here. In 2014, he purchased a store in the U.S. as 
an investment. The business failed, and he returned to working as a linguist so he could 
support his family. He estimated he has approximately $80,000 to $100,000 in his U.S. 
bank account. He does not own any property or have a bank account in Afghanistan. 
Applicant intends to permanently reside in the United States.9  
 
Applicant has loyally served as a linguist for U.S. forces in Afghanistan. He has 
served during combat missions and been subjected to hostile fire. He does not discuss 
his work with any of his family. They do not know where he resides when he is working. 
He is committed to protecting U.S. interests. He provided letters of appreciation for his 
work with U.S. forces in Afghanistan.10 
 
Afghanistan11 
 
 The United States Department of State’s travel warning for Afghanistan remains in 
effect and it warns U.S. citizens against travel there because of continued instability and 
threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel there is unsafe due to 
ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, and armed rivalry 
between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, suicide bombings, and insurgent 
attacks. These attacks may also target Afghan and U.S. Government convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas.  
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State in Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS), and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the 
country. These terrorist groups routinely attack Afghan, coalition forces, and U.S. targets 
with little regard for or the express intent to cause civilian casualties. Due to security 
concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. Government employees and their family 
members is restricted and requires prior approval from the State Department.  
 
Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by 
different terrorist groups. These groups remain active and were able to conduct a number 
of high-profile, mass-casualty attacks in Kabul against sectarian and Afghan government 
targets. They continue to plan such attacks against U.S. and coalition forces and Afghan 
interests. Border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. 
The Afghan government struggles to assert control over this remote region.  
                                                          
8 Tr. 43-53, 56; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. 53-56, 61-65. 
 
10 Tr. 36-39; AE A, B, C, D. 
 
11 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
According to a June 2017 U.S. Department of Defense report on Afghanistan, 
Afghanistan faces a continuing threat from as many as 20 insurgent and terrorist networks 
present and operating in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, in what is the highest 
concentration of extremist and terrorist groups in the world. 
 
 The State Department’s report on human rights for Afghanistan notes there was 
widespread violence, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians and killings of persons 
affiliated with the government by armed insurgent groups, widespread disregard for the 
rule of law and little accountability for those who committed human rights abuses. There 
was also targeted violence and endemic societal discrimination against women and girls.  
 
 Afghanistan remains an important partner of the United States in the fight against 
terrorism, working with the U.S. to eliminate terrorist groups. The U.S. Government 
continues to invest resources to help Afghanistan improve its security, governance, 
institutions, and economy. The U.S. Government has a strong bilateral partnership with 
the Afghan government. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to 
Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against 
U.S. citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in Afghanistan that 
specifically target Americans. Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, ISIS, 
and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the country. These 
terrorist groups routinely attack Afghan, coalition forces, and U.S. targets. Border regions 
of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. The Afghan government 
struggles to assert control over this remote region. The State Department’s report on 
human rights for Afghanistan notes there was widespread violence, including 
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and killings of persons affiliated with the Government 
by armed insurgent groups, widespread disregard for the rule of law and little 
accountability for those who committed human rights abuses. 
 
Applicant’s wife, four children, mother, two brothers, four sisters and his parents-
in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant visits his family in Afghanistan 
for several months at a time when he is not employed with a U.S. contractor. He has 
applied for U.S. visas for his wife and children, but that process has not concluded. He 
provides financial support for his mother, wife, and children. Applicant’s family residing in 
Afghanistan creates a heightened risk and a potential foreign influence concern. AG ¶¶ 
7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
8 
 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s family, which includes his mother, wife, four children, two brothers, four 
sisters, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He visits his family 
for months at a time. He has weekly contact with his mother, wife, and children and 
provides financial support for them. He sends the money to his brother. His family lives 
together in a family compound. Applicant’s contact with his family is not casual and 
infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s close relationship with his family in Afghanistan. It is 
an unsafe place for those residing there, and especially for U.S. citizens. Terrorism and 
human rights abuses for people living there are rampant. These groups conduct 
kidnappings and hostage-taking. Terrorist groups in Afghanistan target U.S. citizens. I 
cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between his wife and children, mother, siblings and his wife’s parents and the 
interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2013. He returns to Afghanistan and stays 
for months to visit his family. He is obviously a devoted husband, father, son, and brother. 
He provides financial support for his mother, wife and children. Although he has applied 
for visas for his wife and children, that process has not been completed or approved.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s loyalty, devotion, and commitment when working 
with U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan over the years. I have considered that he 
participated in high-risk, dangerous combat operations and has received letters of 
appreciation for his commitment. I believe Applicant is loyal to the United States. 
However, Afghanistan continues to have significant terrorist activity that specifically 
targets both Afghans and Americans. Applicant’s close relationship with his family in 
Afghanistan, his visits to see his family, and his financial support for them is 
commendable. His familial ties are not minimal. It is too great of a burden to expect him 
to be loyal to the interests of the United States and resolve any conflicts in favor of the 
United States over those of his wife, children, mother, siblings and his wife’s parents. AG 
¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2013. He 
has strong family ties with his wife, children, mother, siblings, and his wife’s parents who 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. I have given considerable weight to Applicant’s 
service to the United States forces in Afghanistan under combat conditions and during 
critical operations. His commitment and loyalty to the United States is noted, but it is not 
outweighed by his familial obligations and loyalty to those closest to him. It is too great a 
burden to expect him to resolve a conflict of interest in favor of the United States instead 
of his family. The heightened risks raised by familial ties in Afghanistan continue to raise 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence and are unmitigated. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
