 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01213 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 23, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On April 27, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.)  On May 16, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 6, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
July 21, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 4 Items, were 
received by Applicant on July 25, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM on 
August 10, 2017 and on September 5, 2017.  Department Counsel had no objection to 
the evidence provided by Applicant on August 10, 2017.  Department Counsel objected 
to the evidence submitted by Applicant on September 5, 2017, but states no basis for 
the objection.  Both responses are admitted into evidence, and marked as Applicant’s 
Exhibits A and B.  DOHA assigned the case to me on November 9, 2017.  Applicant had 
no objection to Government’s items.  Therefore, items 1 through 4 are admitted into 
evidence, and hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 4.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017, in 
adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 58 years old.  He has never been married and has no children.  He is 
employed by a defense contractor as an Electronics Technician.  He is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
Applicant served in the United States Marine Corps from May 1976 until 
December 1978 when he received an honorable discharge with severance pay for a 
physical disability.  He has been working for his current employer since November 
1994.  He has held his current security clearance since May 2006.   
 
The SOR identified three allegations under this guideline concerning Applicant’s 
failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2015; and his failure 
to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012 and 
2013.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations.   Applicant attributes 
his failure to file his income tax returns on laziness; and his belief the he was due a 
 
3 
 
refund; and his knowledge that he could delay filing his income tax returns for three 
years without forfeiting his refund.     
 
 Applicant acknowledges his misunderstanding of the tax laws and his mistake in 
not filing his income tax returns in a timely fashion.  He states that he is serious about 
fixing his past problem and is remorseful.  He has now filed the income tax returns in 
question, and has provided copies of his Federal income tax account transcript showing 
that he has filed his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2015, 
and 2016.  He provided a copy of his 2014 Federal tax return tracking result that shows 
that he has filed this return.  He has also provided copies of his state income tax returns 
for tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  He 
realizes that going forward, he must continue to file his income tax returns on time, if he 
is to continue to be security clearance worthy.  Not getting around to filing ones income 
tax returns shows poor judgment and unreliability and disqualifies one from access to 
classified information.  Applicant has made a good faith effort to resolve his filing 
problems and has now filed his income taxes, and corrected his tax problems. He states 
that he will never allow this situation to ever occur again.    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
 
4 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
  Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2015.  Applicant’s conscious decision to avoid his legal 
 
5 
 
duty to file his income tax returns indicates that he has a problem complying with well-
established governmental rules and systems.  His actions demonstrate both a history of 
and a unwillingness to abide by the law.  By not fulfilling his legal obligation to file his 
income tax returns, Applicant has not demonstrated the high degree of judgment and 
reliability required to hold a security clearance.  In Applicant’s response to the FORM, 
he provides copies of both of his Federal and state income tax returns that he has filed 
for the years in question.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.   
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.  
 
  Applicant regrets not filing his income taxes in a timely fashion.  He has now filed 
the income tax returns in question, and has corrected his tax problems.  He now 
correctly understands the application of both Federal and state law concerning his 
annual tax filing obligation.  He also understands that going forward he must file his 
income tax returns in a timely fashion, and that his chronic history of not filing in the 
past, must never occur again.  In the event that it does, his security clearance will be in 
immediate jeopardy.  In order to continue to be eligible for access to classified 
information, Applicant must demonstrate good judgment and reliability in every area of 
his life, including his financial affairs and the timely filing of his income tax returns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
