 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01382 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 23, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On November 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.)  On May 30, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
July 28, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 3 Items, were 
received by Applicant on August 3, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM on 
September 1, 2017 and it was admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit A.  DOHA 
assigned the case to me on December 18, 2017.  Applicant had no objection to 
Government’s items.  Therefore, items 1 through 3 are admitted into evidence, and 
hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 3.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and is married with two teenagers.  He has an 
associate’s degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Engineer.  He is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.   He has 
been working for his current employer since August 2005.   
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
The SOR identified four allegations under this guideline concerning Applicant’s 
failure to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, 
and 2012, 2014, and 2015.  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits each the 
allegations, except 1.c., which he denies, and claims he is working to resolve.  Applicant 
attributes his failure to file his income tax returns on his shortsightedeness.  He 
erroneously believed that he had a three-year window in which to file his income tax 
returns for a refund.  After researching the filing rules, Applicant now understands that 
he was mistaken, and he has taken action to correct his mistakes.  
  
Applicant attributes his extended delay in filing his returns to a series of 
circumstances beyond his control that caused him to be extremely stressed.  In 2009, 
 
3 
 
Applicant house was burned down, repairs exceeding $170,000 and his family was out 
of their home for ten months.  In May 2016, his daughter was in a vehicle accident and 
sustained serious back injuries.  His father was very ill since 2015 and his declining 
health led to his recent death in April 2017.  (Applicant provide copies of both his 
daughter’s accident report and his father’s death certificate.)  (See, Applicant’s Exhibit 
A.)  Applicant was also been occupied handling his father’s estate and related issues.   
 
Despite these unexpected, difficult life events, Applicant now understands that he 
must always file both his state and Federal income tax returns in a timely fashion, no 
matter what occurs.  He is still held responsible for filing his income tax returns.  
Applicant expresses that he is extremely embarrassed and ashamed for making this 
mistake. 
 
Even if Applicant truly believed that he could file his income tax returns late, 
without incurring a penalty, as long as he was receiving refunds, he has shown no 
evidence of the required extension, nor is there evidence of the fact that he had 
calculated his taxes and knew he would receive refunds.  The three year statute of 
limitations in claiming a refund does not mean that an individual is exempt from filing 
their annual income tax returns in a timely fashion.  
 
 Applicant has now filed the income tax returns in question, and has provided 
copies of both his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, 
2012, 2014, and 2015.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, enclosure 2.)  Applicant also states that 
he has now filed his 2013 state income tax return and no longer owes $184.48, but 
instead, according to his return, he is now entitled to a refund of $13. Applicant states 
that he now has a good grasp on the filing timelines and will ensure future filings are 
conducted on time. In addition, he has decided to have his future income tax returns 
handled by a professional, as his returns are becoming more complex with his daughter 
starting college.  Applicant further states that this mistake of his is an aberration and not 
a normal pattern of his conduct.  He states that he is usually responsible and 
trustworthy and will continue to demonstrate good judgment and reliability in the future.   
 
 Three character letters from coworkers and friends of the Applicant, all of whom 
have worked with the Applicant over the years, and at times, on a daily basis, attest to 
his sound judgment, conscientious and hardworking nature, as well as his honesty and 
trustworthiness.  Applicant’s work product is described as “always technically sound” 
and he is considered extremely reliable and responsible.  They all enjoy working with 
the Applicant.   (Applicant’s Exhibit A, enclosure 3) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
5 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
  Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014 and 2015.  He was also indebted to a state tax 
authority for delinquent back taxes for tax year 2013 in the amount of $184.48. 
Applicant’s conscious decision to avoid his legal duty to file his income tax returns 
indicates that he has a problem complying with well-established governmental rules and 
systems.  His actions demonstrate both a history of, and a unwillingness to, abide by 
the law.  By not fulfilling his legal obligation to file his income tax returns, Applicant has 
not demonstrated the high degree of judgment and reliability required to hold a security 
clearance.  In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provides copies of both of his 
Federal and state income tax returns that he has filed for the years in question.  
Applicant also states that he has now filed his 2013 state income tax return and no 
longer owes $184.48.  According to his income tax return he is now entitled to a refund 
of $13.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition.   
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
            In addition to his shortsightedness, Applicant had a serious misunderstanding of 
the legal requirements to file annual income tax returns in a timely fashion. He 
mistakenly thought he had three years to file his return for a refund.  Applicant also 
experienced a series of devastating events that contributed to his delay in filing his tax 
returns, namely a house fire, his daughter’s very serious car accident wherein she 
sustained back injuries, and his father’s illness and recent death in 2017.  Applicant has 
made a good faith effort to resolve his problem, and has filed the income tax returns in 
question, and has corrected his tax problems.  He understands that he must always 
comply with Federal and state law, and he now understands what the law means.  He 
has researched the issue and now understands that going forward he must file his 
annual income tax returns in a timely fashion, and that his chronic history of not filing in 
the past, must never happen again.  In the event that it does, Applicant’s security 
clearance will be in immediate jeopardy.   In order to continue to be eligible for access 
to classified information, Applicant must consistently demonstrate good judgment and 
reliability in every area of his life, including his financial affairs, as well as the timely 
filing of his annual income tax returns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
