 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01591 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 17, 2014. 
On July 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline E. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on September 7, 2017. On September 8, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on September 9, 2017, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on January 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old shipping and receiving clerk employed by a federal 
contractor since October 2014. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant has never married and has no children. He attended a university from 
August 2002 to January 2005 but did not receive a degree. 
 
 In April 2003, Applicant was charged with unauthorized use of a vehicle. The 
charge is reflected in law enforcement records, and he admitted it in his response to the 
SOR. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that he was required to attend 
driving school, but he provided no other information about the basis for charge, its 
disposition, or what punishment, if any, was imposed. This charge was alleged in SOR 
¶1.a. 
 
 Law enforcement records reflect that, in June 2005, Applicant was charged with 
violation of the state firearms act. He disclosed this arrest in his SCA. In a personal subject 
interview (PSI) in September 2015, he told an investigator that the arrest occurred after 
he confronted a person whom he suspected of stealing his dog. The person threatened 
to call the police and told Applicant that he was armed. Applicant told the person that he 
also was armed. The police arrived and cited Applicant for possession of a pistol without 
a permit. He had a permit but was not carrying it with him at the time. Applicant was taken 
before a magistrate, but he was released after his mother brought his permit to the 
courthouse. This charge is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant was terminated from employment at a discount department 
store. He disclosed his termination in his SCA, but he provided no details. In the 
September 2015 PSI, he told an investigator that a group of eight young males came to 
the store at night, started playing kickball with a large soft drink, and threw cans and soft 
drinks on the floor. When he told them to stop, they surrounded him, he felt threatened, 
and he punched and shoved one of them. The police arrived, but the group had already 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
fled. Applicant’s manager fired him for throwing the first punch. His termination is alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
 Law enforcement records reflect that, in March 2012, Applicant was charged with 
driving while his license was suspended. In the September 2015 PSI, Applicant told an 
investigator that, unbeknownst to him, his license had been suspended for an unpaid 
ticket issued in in 2002. He received the ticket after he gave a ride to a woman and her 
three children during a rainstorm, and he was ticketed because the children were not 
secured in car seats. He paid the fine and penalties and his driver’s license was 
reinstated.3 This charge is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 Law enforcement record reflect that, in August 2014, Applicant was charged with 
receiving stolen property, a felony. In the PSI, Applicant told an investigator that his 
nephew stole money from him and bought a pistol. In an effort to recoup his money, 
Applicant pawned the pistol for $280. Applicant told the investigator that he did not know 
the pistol was stolen. In February 2015, he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor, and was 
sentenced to hard labor for 12 months, suspended for 24 months, and a $100 fine and 
court costs. This charge is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to a questions whether, in 
the past seven years, he had been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or other 
type of law enforcement official. He also answered “No” to a question whether he was on 
trial or pending trial on criminal charges. He did not disclose the August 2014 arrest for 
receiving stolen property.  In the PSI, he told an investigator that he did not disclose the 
2014 arrest because it occurred after he filled out his SCA, and he did not explain why he 
did not disclose that he was pending trial. His explanation is contradicted by the record, 
which reflects that he was arrested in August 2014 but did not submit his SCA until 
December 2014. He did not provide any further explanation in his answer to the SOR, 
and he did not respond to the FORM. His failures to disclose his arrest and pending trial 
are alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
                                                          
3 Applicant disclosed an arrest for unpaid tickets in July 2008, which appears to be unrelated to this unpaid 
ticket. The arrest in July 2008 is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 4
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
Applicant’s disclosures in his SCA, his admissions in his answer to the SOR, and 
the documentary evidence in the record establish the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information;  
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
 
 6
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence in the record regarding the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a 
to establish any mitigating conditions. The conduct in alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d is 
mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c). The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 17(f) also applies to the 
unfounded weapons charge alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. No mitigating conditions are 
established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal conduct. 
 
  
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
