                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
                          )     ISCR  Case No.  17-01343          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson,  Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On May 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the September 2006
adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals who require initial or
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive
position. The new guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.
Procedures for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be
governed by DoD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the
AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the
issuance of the SOR would not change the decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 31, 2017, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on September
26, 2017. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5) Applicant relied on
one witness (himself) and four exhibits. (AEs A-D) The transcript was received on
October  4,  2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of a zero
balance reported with respect to the debt covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.f. For good cause
shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel
was afforded two days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the
record with documentation of settlement of each credit card account for less than the full
balance for each account. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without objection as AE
E. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) is indebted to the Department of
Education (DoE for six delinquent student loans placed for collection of loan amounts
exceeding $28,000 and (b) is indebted for two delinquent credit card accounts exceeding
$4,500. Allegedly, these reported debts are unpaid and unresolved.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the alleged student loan debts
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and 1.g-1.h and the consumer debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.f
with explanations. He admitted SOR ¶ 1.e in part, admitting his wife listed him as a user 
on the account she created. He disputed the student loan debts, claiming he believed
they were all covered by his GI Bill education benefits, which today are characterized as
education benefits authorized by the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) for eligible
military service members who have completed their required service. Elaborating, he
claimed that after further clarifications from the DoE, he now believes that all of the listed
SOR student loan debts represent valid obligations, which he will begin addressing. 
Applicant further claimed that after his wife (a teacher) was forced to accept a 10%
pay reduction, both he and his wife experienced financial strains to the point where they
became unexpectedly overextended. He claimed that the SOR ¶ 1.f debt belongs to him
2
and was reported to him by the creditor as a canceled debt. Applicant disputed this SOR
¶ 1.f debt for the reason he believes he no longer owes the debt in light of the creditor’s
charge-off.
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old security guard for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in March 2009 and has one child from this marriage. (GE 1) He
earned a high school diploma in June 1987. (GE 2) He attended on-line courses
conducted by a for-profit university between April 2009 and May 2013, but did not obtain
a degree or diploma. (GE 2; Tr. 34-35) He financed his education with six student loans
exceeding $28,000. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 36-37)
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps Reserve in September 1989 and served 15
months of active duty and received an honorable discharge. (GE 10 He enlisted in the
Army National Guard in his state in April 2006 and continues to serve as an active
reservist with his state’s Army National Guard with an E-6 pay grade. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 32) 
Since January 2010, he has maintained a specialty in motor transportation. (GEs 1-2) His
Army National Guard service does not require a security clearance. (GE 1)
Applicant has worked for his current security agency since April 2016. (GE 1; Tr.
33) Between January 2011 an April 2016, he worked for a security protection firm as a
security officer. Previously, he has worked for non-DoD employers in various types of
work assignments for very low wages. (GE 1; Tr. 33, 39-40)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2010 and 2013, Applicant accumulated six delinquent student loans
exceeding $28,000. (GEs 3-5) These loans were taken out in Applicant’s name by his
wife holding his power of attorney for herself and Applicant to supplement the funds he
received from the Federal Government under his VA benefits program. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 35-
36, 38-41) At the time he committed to these student loans, he believed that these loans
(save for $300 a month for living expenses) were covered by his VA program. (Tr. 41-42)
Because he did not think that the loans were valid, he let them go into default. (Tr.  41) 
Once Applicant  became aware that the student loans in his name were valid and
had nothing to do with his VA benefits program, which covered his class tuition, he
resolved to pay them. (Tr. 41) Not until he talked with an official from  DoE in 2017 did he
come to realize that these loans taken out by his wife in his name were not covered by
the VA benefits program and were his responsibility. (GE 2; Tr. 43-44)
3
Applicant still suffers from a memory and cognitive disability attributable to a
diagnosed traumatic brain injury (TBI) he incurred in the Gulf War in 1991 while exposed
to ordinance and explosives. Applicant continues to receive treatment from the VA. (Tr.
38) 
Addressing his disability, he gave his wife a power of attorney to act on his behalf
in legal matters. (Tr. 38-39)  She used his power of attorney to take out standard DoE
student loans in 2009 and 2012 that were not covered by Applicant’s VA benefits
program. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 41-43) While Applicant’s VA benefits program covered his tuition
payments, it did not cover either of their personal expenses. (Tr. 42-43) Applicant’s wife
still holds his power of attorney and continued to receive collection notices from his
student loan lender. (Tr. 38-39)
Applicant’s wife is a school teacher who took a 10% pay reduction several years
ago. Her pay decrease has continued to impact their ability tp keep up with their family
bills. (Tr.  46-47) Since becoming aware of his student loan obligations, Applicant applied
for, and was accepted in DoE’s loan rehabilitation program in May 2017. (AE C; Tr. 43-
45) Monthly payments of $108 were set up for Applicant in May 2017. To date, he has
documented $550 in monthly payments in June 2017, and is in good standing with his
DoE student loan lender. (AEs C-D; Tr. 43-44)
Besides his student loans, Applicant accumulated over $4,500 in joint delinquent
credit card debt that he and his wife used to cover their living expenses. (Tr. 47) These
debts consist of two credit card accounts: one in his wife’s name (SOR ¶ 1.e for $2,455)
and one in Applicant’s name (SOR ¶ 1.f for $2,047). (AEs A-B; Tr. 19-22) Initially, creditor
¶ 1.f charged off its loan and issued Applicant a cancellation of debt (Form 1099-C) in
December 2016. (AE A)  When Applicant pressed the creditor to settle the debt after
receiving the SOR in May 2017, the creditor offered Applicant terms in June 2017 as
follows: a single payment of $716 by June 2018 in full settlement of the listed debt. (AE A)
By ensuing telephone discussions, Applicant agreed to make a scheduled payment of
$716 by August 16, 2017 to settle SOR debt ¶ 1.f. (AE A) Applicant made this scheduled
payment and satisfied the debt in full for less than the full balance due. (AE E) 
By similar telephonic agreement, Applicant settled his joint debt reported in his
wife’s name that is covered by SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,455). This debt had also been charged off
by the creditor, who likewise issued a cancellation of debt in December 2016. (AE B)
Payment terms for satisfying this debt called for Applicant’s making a $982 payment by
June 2018. (AE B) Applicant made this scheduled payment and satisfied the debt in full
for less than the full amount. (AE  E)  
Applicant and his wife have developed a budget for managing their monthly
expenses and have begun to put aside between $400 and $800 a month in savings
accounts for a rainy day. (Tr. 49-50) Applicant expressed gratitude for his job and has
been active in cleaning up his debts. (Tr. 48-50)
4
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
5
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accrual of delinquent student loan
debts and two delinquent consumer accounts. Applicant’s accumulating of delinquent
student loan consumer debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of delinquent
student loan and consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof. See
6
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s delinquent consumer
debts are fully documented in his credit reports and create some judgment issues. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Extenuating circumstances (i.e., unemployment and personal medical issues)
have accounted for a good deal of Applicant’s financial problems with his student loan
and consumer debts. MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” fully applies to Applicant’s
situation.
Since learning from the DoE that his student loan debts are rightfully his and are
not covered by his VA benefits, Applicant has made considerable progress in
addressing his delinquent student loans and is now in good standing in the lender’s
rehabilitation He has also documented his resolution of his two delinquent credit card
accounts.   
Applicant’s responsible efforts in addressing his debts with the limited resources
available to him while working low-income jobs with a treatable memory disability and
reduced income from his wife enable him to take advantage of the acting responsibly
under the circumstances prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
Applicant’s corrective steps taken to resolve his student loan and consumer
debts through a combination of payments and settlement agreements enable him to
avail himself of the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated and is
adhering to a  good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
Applicant is credited with making concerted effort to resolve his debts once he was
informed of his valid student loan obligations the status and achieved good-paying
employment with his current employer. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) in Applicant’s case, his demonstrated responsible efforts in
addressing his SOR-listed tax and consumer obligations enable favorable findings and
conclusions to be reached with respect to security concerns raised in connection with 
his security clearance application.
7
Whole-person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is favorable to Applicant. He has shown sufficient 
progress to date in addressing his delinquent student loans and two delinquent credit
cards covered in the SOR to merit positive overall credit. The contributions he is
credited with making to his security agency and to the defense industry generally, and
the meritorious military service he continues to provide as a member of his state’s Army
National Guard fully noted. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his
finances and demonstrating his trustworthiness reflect restored financial responsibility
and judgment and resolve questions about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s student loan and consumer debt accumulations that he is either addressing
with payment agreements or has settled with payment agreements, enough probative
evidence of financial progress has been presented to mitigate financial concerns.
Conclusions are warranted that his finances are sufficiently stabilized at this time to
meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance.    
Favorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under
the facts and circumstances of this case is consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
     GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h                 For Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to hold a
security clearance. Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
  
10
