 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01003 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). National security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 5, 2015, Applicant completed and signed his security clearance 
application (SCA). On June 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) under Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), which is applicable to all covered individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position on or after June 8, 2017. The SOR set forth security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On June 21, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer), and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Item 4) On August 1, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten 
items, was mailed to Applicant. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. On August 15, 2017, Applicant 
submitted a one-page response, marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection from the Government. Applicant did not object 
to Items 1 through 10, which were also admitted into evidence. On November 13, 
2017, the case was assigned to me.    
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is a 63-year-old program 
director employed by a DoD contractor since October 2014. He was previously 
employed by another Federal contractor from July 2009 to August 2014. From 2000 to 
approximately 2006, he was the president and CEO of his own business. Applicant 
attended some college courses over the years, but he did not earn a degree. He was 
married from 1980 to 2005, at which time he was divorced. He married his second 
spouse in 2007. He is the father of two adult sons, ages 39 and 34. (Items 1, 4, 5 and 
6) 
 The SOR alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed by Applicant in 2006 (¶ 1.a), and 
four allegations stating that he owes the Federal government for delinquent taxes 
covering tax years 2004, 2005, 2007 and 2008. (¶¶ 1.b-1.e.) The combined amount of 
his delinquent Federal taxes totaled $103,742. Applicant admitted all of the allegations 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) in his Answer to the SOR. The SOR also 
alleges that he deliberately failed to disclose that he had both a tax lien filed against 
him within the last seven years, and he had current delinquent Federal debt, when he 
completed his SCA in January 2015. (¶ 2.a) Applicant denied this allegation under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized DoD investigator on March 26, 
2015. The record of the interview was provided to Applicant in April 2017. After making 
a minor correction to the record, Applicant adopted the report of his interview as 
accurate. (Item 6) During the interview, Applicant was asked if he had any tax liens 
filed against him in the last seven years, and he gave a negative response. The 
investigator confronted him with a Federal tax lien that was filed in May 2010 in the 
amount of $20,012.00. Applicant stated that he had been aware since 2002 that he 
owed Federal taxes due to his failed business. Despite being aware of the tax issue, 
he waited four years before he communicated with the IRS. In 2006, he signed an 
installment agreement which included over $100,000 in Federal tax debt. Applicant 
claimed to be making monthly payments of $1,072 to the IRS, however, he believed 
that his tax debt had increased due to the high interest rate. He also stated his 
 
3 
 
 
business failure was the reason he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2006. His 
bankruptcy petition shows that he owed the IRS over $152,000 in 941 withholding 
taxes, which is what an employer withholds from an employee’s paycheck for income 
taxes, social security tax, or Medicare tax. He admitted to the investigator that he had 
never sought credit counseling. (Items 6 and 8) 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was not truthful on the January 2015 SCA 
when he failed to disclose both an outstanding tax lien and his delinquent Federal tax 
obligation. In his Answer, Applicant states that he never received official notice of the 
tax lien from the IRS. In addition, he did not consider himself as being “delinquent” on 
his Federal tax debt since he was currently making monthly payments to the IRS. 
(Items 1, 4 and 5) 
 The Federal tax transcripts in the record (Item 7) show that as of January 2017, 
Applicant was no longer a party to an installment agreement with the IRS. As of May 
2017, his outstanding Federal taxes totaled $103,743.74. The records also show that 
he was involved in several installment agreements over the years that were eventually 
cancelled by the IRS. Before Applicant completed the SCA in January 2015, his most 
recent installment payment to the IRS occurred in September 2013. The installment 
agreement in effect at that time was terminated by the IRS in January 2014. For the 
entire year of 2014 and up to the January 2015, Applicant had not made any 
installment payments to the IRS. 
 The tax transcripts also disclosed that Applicant received a Notice of Intent to 
Levy by the IRS, which was signed by him on a returned receipt dated March 31, 
2010. A tax lien was filed against him in May 2010, and in that same month, he was 
issued a Notice of Lien Filing and Right to Collection Due Process Hearing. Applicant 
returned a Collection Due Process request in June 2010. Applicant’s response to the 
Government’s FORM (AE A) was that he did not remember that a tax lien had been 
filed against him. He also stated that the tax issues from his failed business have 
exceeded the statute of limitations. (Items 4, 7, AE A) 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s national security 
eligibility.    
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
 
5 
 
 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I 
have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19, and the following 
three are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant previously filed and had debts discharged through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. He currently owes over $103,000 for unpaid Federal taxes for various tax 
years. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
6 
 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant got into tax trouble with a failed business venture. This incident 
occurred under such circumstances that was beyond his control, and unlikely to recur.  
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) partially apply. The next prong, however, before the full 
application of the mitigating factors can be applied, is to look at whether the incident 
casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and determine 
if he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been aware of his 
unpaid taxes since 2002. He did not take any action to contact the IRS until 2006, the 
same year he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His delay in promptly addressing his tax 
issue, and his inability to adhere to an installment agreement over the years, caused 
him to accumulate a substantial Federal tax debt that is still unresolved. His failure to 
adequately address his tax issues casts doubt on his reliability and good judgment and 
shows that he did not act responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 
(b) do not apply.   
 
 For the application of AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d), there must be a showing that 
Applicant has or is receiving counseling for the tax problem, and he has initiated and 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the IRS. There is insufficient evidence to show 
that Applicant has received any counseling for his tax problems. During his 
background interview, he admitted that he had not received any financial counseling. 
As mentioned above, the tax transcripts show that he has entered into several 
installment agreements with the IRS since 2008, and that these agreements were later 
terminated by the IRS. As of January 2017, Applicant was not currently adhering to an 
installment agreement with the IRS. He has not yet articulated a realistic plan for 
resolving his delinquent tax debt of over $103,000. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply.    
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) applies to these facts and circumstances: deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
 
7 
 
 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not disclose on his 2015 SCA both an outstanding Federal tax lien 
and his delinquent Federal obligation, as required. There is sufficient evidence to show 
his omission was intentional to support the application of the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; and 
 
(b) the offense is so minor or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
 In his Answer, Applicant denied he was aware of his 2010 tax lien since he did 
not receive any notice from the IRS. The tax transcripts show that this was not the 
case, based on signed receipts from the Applicant. In addition, Applicant claimed that 
he did not believe he had “delinquent” Federal debt, because at that time, he was 
making monthly payments to the IRS. The tax transcripts show that his claim is not 
true. Before completing the SCA in January 2015, his most recent installment payment 
to the IRS occurred in September 2013. The current installment agreement in effect at 
that time terminated in January 2014. For the entire year of 2014, up until he 
completed his SCA in January 2015, Applicant had not made any payments to the 
IRS. There is insufficient evidence to support the application of the above mitigating 
conditions. 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s failed business 
caused him to accumulate delinquent Federal tax debt. Despite being aware of the tax 
problem in 2002, Applicant failed to communicate with the IRS until 2006. He failed to 
adhere to an installment agreement with the IRS over the years. In addition, his failure 
to be completely candid on the 2015 SCA was deliberate, and his explanations for the 
omission were not credible. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to 
Applicant’s good judgment, reliability as well as his national security eligibility. 
Because protection of the national interest is the principle focus of these adjudications, 
any unresolved doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified 
information.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
