 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-00781 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
02/07/2018 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate the concerns raised 
under the financial considerations guideline or the alcohol consumption and criminal 
conduct guidelines. Access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 22, 2013, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). On April 28, 
2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, which became effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
Specifically, the amended SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline 
G (alcohol consumption), Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline J (criminal 
conduct). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the administrative 
(written record). (Item 3) 
 
On July 14, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s written 
case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department Counsel 
 
2 
                                         
 
forwarded to Applicant 14 exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant submitted a 
response to the FORM (Response). The information accompanying the FORM and the 
documents Applicant submitted with his Answer and Response are admitted into the 
record. On November 21, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing then National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information.  (Item 4) 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old nuclear machinist who has worked for the same defense 
contractor for almost five years. (Item 5) In 2005, he graduated from high school. He 
attended college for about one year, and he also attended a technical institute, but he did 
not receive a degree or diploma. He has never married. Applicant has never held a 
security clearance. (Item 5)  
 
Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct  
 
In October 2013, Applicant, after being stopped by the police, was arrested and 
charged with Driving under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI). He was found guilty of 
misdemeanor DUI. He was placed on probation for two years. (Item 7) He also received 
a restricted driver’s license for one year.  (Item 7)  Applicant admitted that he had a few 
drinks and that he should not have been driving. He attended and successfully completed 
an ASAP class and paid a fine. (Item 4) While he was still on probation, Applicant was 
charged with another DUI. This happened on November 23, 2015 when Applicant was 
visiting family and consumed two half-full red solo cups of straight whiskey.  
  
Applicant failed to appear in court for this second DUI, and as of May 2017, the 
charge was unresolved. (Item 4) In January 2016, a bench warrant was issued after he 
failed to appear in court for the DUI charge from November 2015. He has a misdemeanor-
level criminal conviction for DUI. 
 
Applicant responded that his use of alcohol has never affected his work. He noted 
that it is not an addiction and he has never received a complaint at work. He reported that 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
he only drank on special occasions and not every day. He also disputed that he was on 
unsupervised probation during his subject interview, but the disposition summary in the 
record states that he was placed on a two-year probation. (Item 5, 7)  He is in the process 
of resolving the bench warrant issue. He wrote that he moved to another location and 
could not return to the court. He has found a lawyer to represent him, and he will get the 
matter resolved. He noted that no one is perfect. He just made a mistake.  (Response to 
FORM). According to Applicant, he never drank every day and has basically stopped 
drinking. He acknowledged that before 2016, he drank on weekends when he was not 
working. There is no diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence in the record. He has 
never sought counseling or treatment. (Item 5)    
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $6,825; that 
Applicant’s wages were garnished in 2016 to satisfy a state tax lien; and that he failed to 
pay Federal and state income taxes for tax years 2013 and 2014. 
 
 Applicant explained that when he was young, he did not handle his finances 
properly. He did not learn the basics of having a budget and paying bills. He understands 
that he made bad decisions. He was also unemployed various times. He acknowledges 
his debts and does not make excuses. It is his intention to resolve all delinquencies. He 
has worked with his current employer for four years and loves his job. He stated that he 
obtained a financial counselor, planned a budget and began to pay his debts. He also 
filed his income tax returns each year and does not understand why he still owes money 
because he set up a payment plan.  He believes he only owes for tax year 2013. He told 
the Government to garnish his pay check in 2015 so that the debt would be repaid. (Item 
6) 
 
 As to SOR 2.a, a 2016 judgment for $1,767, it has been satisfied and the 
Government stipulated to the payment. (Item 13) 
 
 As to SOR 2.b, a car loan in the amount of $14,798, with a past-due amount of 
$1,175, Applicant’s girlfriend did not make the promised payments. She gave it to 
someone else who did not make payments and the car was stolen and totaled. Applicant 
stated that he informed the credit union but there is nothing in the record concerning any 
resolution of the loan. He assumed that insurance paid the amount owed, but he did not 
submit any documentation to support his claim. 
 
 As to SOR 2.c, 2.f, and 2.g, Applicant stated that these accounts have been paid 
in full. He did not provide any receipts or other evidence of payment.    
 
 As to SOR 2.d, a collection account in the amount of $2,466, Applicant admits that 
he has not paid the rent for an apartment that he leased in 2010. He vacated the 
apartment in 2010 and stated that he did not have the money to pay the rent. He has not 
made any payments since 2010. This collection account remains delinquent. (Item 6) 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
 As to SOR 2.e, a collection account for $241, Applicant stated that he had a 
payment plan, with one payment left. There is nothing in the record to substantiate his 
assertion. 
 
 As to SOR 2.h, Applicant’s wages were garnished in the amount of $2,863 to 
satisfy a state tax lien. The garnishment began in 2015. 
 
 As to SOR 2.i, failure to file state income tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and 
2013 as required, the allegation was withdrawn by the Government. 
 
 As to SOR 2. j, Applicant failed to pay his Federal income taxes for tax year 2013 
and 2014.  His wages were garnished and he believes he has paid the taxes for 2014, 
but he believes he still owes “a little” for tax year 2013. He did not submit any information 
to confirm his assertions.  
 
     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
 
5 
                                         
 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
   
  AG ¶ 22 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol2 to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
                                            
2 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines, the generally 
accepted definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA 
 
6 
                                         
 
   
  An Administrative “Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the 
applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines and an 
applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶ 22(a) applies. Applicant’s two DUIs involving the police and courts happened 
in October 2013 and November 2015. He was convicted for the first DUI and placed on  
two years probation. He did not appear in court for the second DUI, which is still 
unresolved.  
   
  AG ¶ 23 details conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
   
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
                                            
Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/ 
NewsletterNumber3.pdf. “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United 
States.” See the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and 
when women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. 
 
7 
                                         
 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show many 
different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a fairly 
lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 
3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).     
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption. Applicant’s latest DUI was 
in 2015, but has not been resolved due to his failure to appear in court. The record does 
not reflect any other alcohol incidents. Applicant did not complete probation before the 
second DUI in 2015. He completed an alcohol education class and claims that he rarely 
drinks. There is not sufficient evidence to resolve my doubts about Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Alcohol consumption security concerns 
are not  mitigated.   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
18. The Concern. Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress 
can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash 
flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other negative financial indicators; 
and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
           Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he was young. He had some 
unemployment, but he has been steadily employed in the last four years. He accumulated 
debt, which he has not resolved. He also did not pay state or federal income taxes as 
required. In 2015, his wages were garnished to pay state income tax. He still owes for 
federal taxes. Applicant satisfied one judgment. He stated that he paid or has payment 
plans for the other alleged delinquencies in the SOR, but he presented no evidentiary 
materials. The debts have been outstanding for a number of years. The facts support the 
disqualifying conditions listed above. 
 
 
20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
 
9 
                                         
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file 
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
            In light of the information presented in the record none of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) apply because in January 2016, a bench warrant was 
issued after Applicant failed to appear in court for the DUI charge from November 2015. 
The warrant is currently active. Applicant has not returned to court. Applicant admitted 
the incident of criminal conduct. 
 
AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
 
10 
                                         
 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
For the reasons indicated in the previous section, criminal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. Applicant’s second DUI before the end of his two-year 
probation and failure to appear in court for the November 2015, DUI creates doubt about 
his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and raise questions about his ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines G and 
J are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old nuclear machinist who has worked for his defense 
contractor for almost five years. Applicant has two DUI’s from 2013 and 2015. While he 
did complete an alcohol education class, he committed his second DUI before completing 
his probation for his first DUI conviction. He did not appear in court for the second DUI 
and has not resolved that charge. There is an active bench warrant for Applicant to which 
he has admitted that he has not yet resolved. He has not carried his burden of proof in 
this case. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Alcohol 
consumption, criminal conduct, and financial considerations security concerns are 
mitigated.  
  
 
11 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.j:   Against Applicant 
 
           Paragraph 3, Guideline J:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
            Subparagraph 3.a:                       Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
