 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01951 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and criminal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline J, 
criminal conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 20, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 17, 2018. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on January 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He graduated from high school in 2008 and attended 
college in 2008-2009, but did not earn a degree. He is not married and has no children. 
He held a secret security clearance from 2008 to 2013.1  
 
 Applicant worked full time for a federal contractor from October 2008 to May 
2013. There was a government furlough, and the company lost their contract. He 
worked from June 2013 to May 2014 for a college. He voluntarily resigned from the job 
because he wanted to pursue his hobbies, particularly cycling. He was unemployed 
from May 2014 to September 2014. He worked part time as a bicycle delivery person for 
a sandwich shop from September 2014 to May 2015. He was terminated due to not 
showing up for work and being late. He was unemployed from May 2015 to July 2015. 
He worked as a technician from July 2015 to April 2016, when he voluntarily resigned 
because he wanted to work remotely and his employer wanted him to work in the office. 
He has worked in his current job with a federal contractor beginning part time in May 
2016 and then full time in November 2016 to the present.2 
 
 Applicant lives with his brother in a house owned by their mother. He does not 
pay rent. His only expense is his phone bill. He has a credit card with a $2,500 balance 
that is current. He does not own a car. His past salary was about $45,000. He recently 
got a raise and presently earns about $55,000 annually. He has no investments or 
assets. He has about $400 in the bank. He testified he spends his money on 
entertainment.3  
 
 Applicant had a loan and a credit card he opened in July 2012 and July 2013 
respectively. These accounts were consolidated and are reflected in the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($10,054). The debt is supported by credit reports from July 2016 and May 
2017. Applicant testified that he used loan money to fix a vehicle he owned. He stopped 
paying the loan in approximately 2014 when he began working as a bicycle delivery 
person. He was interviewed by a government investigator in January 2017 and 
explained he discontinued to pay the debt because he did not have a steady job at the 
time. He did not know why he did not resume paying it after he was steadily employed 
in July 2015. He testified that his understanding was that after the delinquent debt was 
charged off, it would not help his credit score even if he did pay it, so he did not see the 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-17. 
 
2 Tr. 17-21, 31-36; GE 1, 2, 3, 4.  
 
3 Tr. 21, 36-37, 42-45. 
 
3 
point in paying it off if it was still going to be held against him. He never contacted the 
creditor or made any attempt to resolve the debt even after it was brought to his 
attention by the government investigator. He has made no effort to pay the debt. At his 
hearing, Applicant said he now intends to pay the debt at some point, but had no 
explanation for why he had not taken any action to do so.4 His testimony was not 
credible.  
 
 Applicant testified that in September 2014, he was in a store, saw headphones 
that he liked, took them out of the packaging, and proceeded to walk out of the store 
and steal them. He was confronted by store security and was arrested. He was charged 
with theft of property valued between $50 and $500. The charges were eventually 
dropped because the witness from the store did not appear in court. He had no 
explanation for his actions. He testified, “It looked pretty easy” to steal them.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-28, 37-41; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 27-30; GE 1, 2, 5, 6. 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so.  
 
 Applicant has a debt that has been delinquent since approximately 2014. 
Applicant admitted he owes the debt and has made no attempt to resolve the debt. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has made no attempt to repay the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR. 
He has been aware it is a trustworthiness concern since his January 2017 interview. He 
has been steadily employed since July 2015. His financial issues are ongoing. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant stopped paying his loan when he voluntarily resigned from his full time 
job so he could pursue cycling. He then worked as a bicycle delivery person. He was 
terminated from that position due to unreliable attendance. His employment issues were 
within his control. He has been working full time since July 2015 and has not made an 
effort to resolve the debt. He has not acted responsibly or initiated a good-faith effort to 
pay debt despite the ability to do so. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) do not apply.   
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct  
 
 The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set 
out in AG & 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 31 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
  
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with theft of property between $50 and $500  
in September 2014. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
32 are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
 Applicant stole headphones from a store. It has been over three years since the 
conduct took place. Applicant offered no explanation for his actions, other than he 
thought “it looked easy.” He offered no evidence of successful rehabilitation other than 
the passage of time, without recurrence of criminal activity. The above mitigating 
conditions have minimal application except for the passage of time.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He has a delinquent debt that he has not made a 
payment on since 2014, despite being employed steadily since July 2015. He has 
minimal expenses and earns $45,000 to $55,000 annually. Because the debt has been 
charged off, he indicated paying it would not help his credit. In September 2014, he 
stole headphones from a store. He was arrested and charged with theft, but the witness 
 
7 
from the store failed to appear, and the charge was dismissed. Applicant had no 
explanation for his actions, other than it looked easy. There is no evidence of 
recurrence of criminal conduct. However, there is also minimal evidence of 
rehabilitation. I have considered all of the evidence including Applicant’s attitude toward 
his delinquent debt and his theft charge. I considered his testimony, demeanor, and 
credibility. I have concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
find Applicant’s conduct raises questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability 
for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
