 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-02053  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Andre M. Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 27, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  On June 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse and Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 2.)  On 
August 30, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on August 30, 2017, and received by him on September 8, 2017. The 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, and his response was admitted into 
evidence.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 5, and they are also admitted into 
evidence.  Hereinafter, they are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He is unmarried with no children.  He has a bachelor’s 
degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Electrical Engineer.  He is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.   
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in January 2016.  He was 
granted an interim security clearance in February 2016.  Applicant admits that he used 
marijuana at various frequencies from September 2011 until at least November 2016.  
He also admits that he purchased marijuana from October 2011 to May 2012, and that 
he most recently purchased marijuana in February 2015.  He stated that he would 
purchase about 1/8 of an ounce every 2-3 weeks so that he could use the marijuana 
whenever he chose to smoke it.  Applicant explained that from May 2015 to November 
2016, he used marijuana once every one to two months to be social and because he 
enjoyed it.  At that time of his security clearance background interview in January 2017, 
Applicant’s use of marijuana had not ended, and he stated that he would continue to 
use it if there were no adverse effects with work.  In his answer to the SOR dated July 
2017, he expressed that he now has no intention of ever using marijuana again.   
 
 In 2012, Applicant was arrested for Possession of Marijuana in a School Zone.  
On this occasion, Applicant and three of his friends did not want to smoke on the school 
campus for fear of being caught, so they walked to the train tracks near campus.  They 
were followed by the police without their knowledge.  The Applicant and his friends were 
arrested and charged with the offense stated above.  Applicant had to remain out of 
trouble for six months and pay a fine.  Both charges were dismissed in October 2012.     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
 
3 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
 
 
4 
 
 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive positon.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains two conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
  
Applicant’s use of marijuana from September 2011 to November 2016 is and 
continues to be against Federal law.  The use of any illegal drug is also prohibited by 
the DoD.  From February 2016 through November 2016, while in possession of a DoD 
 
 
5 
 
 
security clearance, Applicant used marijuana.  Furthermore his criminal arrest in 2012 
for Possession of Marijuana in a School Zone shows both the depth of his involvement 
with this illegal drug, as wells as his immaturity, poor judgment and unreliability.  
Applicant now states that he no longer intends to use marijuana, and there is no other 
evidence of marijuana use in the record since November 2016.  However, given his 
history and pattern of marijuana use over recent years, it cannot be determined that he 
will stop cold turkey.  The likelihood that he will continue to use marijuana in the future is 
great.  At this time, it cannot be found that he is sufficiently responsible to access 
sensitive or classified information. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant was arrested in September 2012 and charged with Possession of 
Marijuana in a School Zone.  He was found guilty and was placed in a one year 
diversion program, and required to pay a court assessment of $755.  This offense gives 
rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability, both because of the nature 
of the offense, and the circumstances surrounding the offense.  The aforementioned 
disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 24-year old 
adult, who is still fairly young and extremely immature.   From 2011 to 2016, he used 
marijuana, which he knew to be illegal.  He also used marijuana after having been 
granted an interim security clearance by the Department of Defense, and continued to 
use marijuana until November 2016.  His arrest in October 2015 for the Illegal 
possession of marijuana shows further poor judgment.  Applicant has not demonstrated 
sufficient responsibility on any level to be eligible for access to classified information.  
Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Drug Involvement or Criminal 
Conduct. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a     Against Applicant 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
