 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02854 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F, personal conduct under Guideline E, and 
handling protected information under Guideline K. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) The Department of Defense (DOD) 
could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance.  
 
On August 30, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F, personal 
conduct under Guideline E, and handling protected information under Guideline K. (Item 
1) The action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AGs were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2017. He admitted the eight 
allegations of delinquent debt under Guideline F, the one allegation of not providing 
complete and accurate information on his e-QIP under Guideline E, and the one 
allegation of deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information under Guideline K. He provided an explanation for his 
debts, his response on the e-QIP, and his handling of protected information. Applicant 
elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on October 24, 2017. (Item 9) Applicant 
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 10, 2017. He was 
provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant responded to the FORM on December 
10 (Item 10) and December 14 (Item 11), 2017. Department counsel had no objection to 
consideration of Applicant’s responses to the FORM. (Item 12) I was assigned the case 
on January 25, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 51 years old, and a high school graduate. He has been a project manager 
for a defense contractor since March 2014. He was unemployed from March 2013 until 
March 2014. Prior to that, he was a project manager for a defense contractor from April 
2011 to March 2013, a technician at an air base in Afghanistan from July 2007 until April 
2011, and a deputy director for another defense contractor from May 2004 until July 
2007. He served on active duty in the Air Force from June 1983 until May 1988, and in 
the Air Force Reserves from July 1999 until April 2011. He married in December 1988 
and divorced in November 2008. He has one adult child. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated July 15, 
2014)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated September 1, 2015; Item 5, 
dated February 7, 2017, and Item 6, dated August 16, 2017) confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a medical debt in collection for $127 (SOR 1.a); a retail 
store credit card debt in collection for $690 (SOR 1.b); a credit card debt charged off for 
$35,906 (SOR 1.c); two telephone service debts in collection for $4,146 (SOR 1.d), and 
$2,498 (SOR 1.e), a charged-off credit card debt for $16,437 (SOR 1.f); a mortgage 
foreclosed for inability to pay monthly mortgage payments (SOR 1.g); and a television 
service debt in collection for $130 (SOR 1.h). The total amount of delinquent debt is 
approximately $60,000.  
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case were considered under the previous AGs.  
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR also lists as a personal conduct security concern Applicant’s failure to 
list his delinquent debts on his security clearance application (SOR 2.a). The SOR lists 
a handling protected information security concern based on Applicant’s action in 
bringing his personal cell phone into a secure area in April 2016 and May 2017 (SOR 
3.a).  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the delinquent debts. He attributes 
his debts to his one year unemployment from March 2013 to March 2014. He thought 
he had various possibilities for employment during the time but the leads did not result 
in Applicant being offered employment. He kept up payments on his debts as best he 
could, primarily focusing on his mortgage, alimony, and payments to the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). He collected unemployment compensation during this time. In 
his initial response to the FORM, Applicant noted he was paying the IRS $500 monthly 
and alimony of $2,000 a month. He also stated that he attempted to negotiate a 
payment plan with the credit card company for the debt at SOR 1.c. He claimed the 
credit card company refused to negotiate and requested a large payment. Applicant 
could not afford the payment. (Item 11) Applicant provided no documents to verify his 
claim of payments to the IRS and for his alimony. He did not present any documentation 
to indicate payments or resolution of any of his debts. Applicant did not present any 
information or documents in response to either the SOR or the FORM to indicate that he 
contacted creditors or paid any debts. He has not presented any evidence that he 
received financial counseling or education, or that he participated in any debt 
consolidation programs 
 
 In response to the personal conduct allegation, Applicant in his SOR response 
noted that he had no valid answer why he did not include his debts on the e-QIP in 
response to financial questions. He may have been in denial of the extent of his 
financial situation. In his 30 years of having access to classified information, he could 
always answer the financial question on his security clearance applications with a no. 
 
 The military unit responsible for the area where Applicant worked, prepared an 
incident report relating that when Applicant first started working in the facility he was 
caught bringing a cell phone into a secure area and received a verbal warning. In May 
2017, Applicant was again observed with a cell phone in a secure area. The phone was 
confiscated and he was no longer permitted to work in the area. (Items 7 and 8) 
 
 In response to the handling protected information SOR allegation, Applicant 
noted that when he arrived to work in the facility in April 2016, cell phones were widely 
used in the facility. Applicant possessed a cell phone in a secure area, and he received 
a verbal warning. When a new unit took over the operation in March 2017, they 
tightened the rules and published a warning that personal cell phones were not 
permitted in security facilities controlled by the unit. In the response to the SOR. 
Applicant did not provide an explanation for his first violation. For the second incident, 
he acknowledged knowing cell phones could no longer be taken into the facility. He 
initially placed the phone in a locked area outside the facility. When he returned from 
 
4 
 
 
lunch, he inadvertently forgot to take the phone from his pocket. The phone was 
confiscated and he was no longer permitted to work in the facility.  
 
 Applicant noted that he served honorably in the Air Force. He has never had a 
security or legal problems. He would not knowingly divulge classified information.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.    
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his or her financial 
obligations. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage 
his or her finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 The Government presented sufficient information in the form of credit reports to 
establish all of the SOR delinquent debts. The information is sufficient to raise issues 
about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations, and raises 
security concerns under the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions 
at AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Once the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. Based on the information provided 
by Applicant, I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous and are 
not resolved so they are recent. Applicant did not provide information concerning 
financial counseling or participation in debt consolidation programs. Good faith means 
acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty 
and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor must his plan require paying 
off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that Applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances. Applicant must establish that he has a reasonable 
plan to resolve financial problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement 
that plan. Applicant’s plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and 
Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. A promise to pay 
delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner 
and acting in a financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant did not provide information to establish that he resolved the debts 
alleged in the SOR, or that he had a plan of how he will pay or resolve the debts. 
Applicant was unemployed for a year, a condition beyond his control, but he received 
unemployment compensation while unemployed. Applicant did not establish that he 
acted reasonably under the circumstances of his unemployment. Applicant presented 
no evidence of debt payments or resolution of any debts. He did not develop or present 
plans to pay his delinquent debts. He did not provide documentation to show proof of 
payments, correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, 
copies of debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other 
evidence of progress or resolution. There is no clear evidence that his debt problems 
have been resolved, so his finances are not under control. There is insufficient evidence 
to establish why Applicant was unable to make greater progress resolving his debts.  
 
 The available evidence shows that Applicant has been employed, except for one 
year, since November 2007. He had a period of unemployment in 2013/2014, but he 
has been gainfully employed since March 2014. His ability to resolve his financial 
problems are within his means and control. He did not present a plan to resolve his 
financial problems or any efforts to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. Accordingly, he 
has not established a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His lack of reasonable and 
 
7 
 
 
responsible actions towards his finances is a strong indication that he will not protect 
and safeguard classified or sensitive information. Applicant did not present sufficient 
information to mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it 
indicates whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence that the person can be 
trusted to properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a 
security clearance depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive 
information is in the best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information concerning the status of his finances. Applicant’s failure to list his delinquent 
debts on his e-QIP raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
 Applicant denied that he intentionally withheld full, complete, and accurate 
information on his security clearance application. He did not list any delinquent debts on 
his e-QIP. Applicant had to know that he had credit card debt when he completed his e-
QIP. He was concentrating on paying his IRS and alimony payments, indicating that he 
knew he had other debts to resolve. The debts are large and not easy to forget and 
ignore. He completed security clearance applications in the past so he knew what to 
include on the application. He may not have known all of the details of his financial 
situation, but he knew he had delinquent debt. Applicant’s failure to list any delinquent 
debt on the e-QIP was deliberate with an intent not to present a true picture of his 
financial situation. His failure to provide the correct information obscured the full extent 
of his financial situation from adjudicators. I find Applicant deliberately failed to provide 
correct and accurate information concerning his debts on his SCA.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Handling Protected Information: 
 
 Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for handling 
protected information-which includes classified and other sensitive government 
information, and proprietary information-raises doubt about an individual’s 
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such 
information , and is a serious security concern. 
 
 Applicant twice violated workplace rules by bringing his personal cell phone into 
a secure facility in violation of the operating rules. This information raises the following 
handling protected information disqualifying condition: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information; 
 
(h) negligence or lapse security practices that persist despite counseling 
by management; and 
 
(i) failure to comply with rules and regulations that result in damage to the 
national security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligence. 
 
 I have consider the following mitigating conditions under (AG ¶ 35): 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude towards the discharge of 
security responsibilities; 
  
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training or 
unclear instructions; and 
 
(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was properly reported, the is no 
evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant violated the same security rules 
twice by bringing a cell phone into a secure facility. The first time was April 2016 and the 
second in May 2017. The violations were recent, frequent, not under unique 
circumstances, and likely to happen again. He did not respond favorably to counseling 
since the violations happened only a year apart. Applicant was warned, counseled, and 
given clear instructions. The violation suggest a pattern of conduct.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s Air Force 
service and his civilian service in a combat zone. Applicant failed to pay delinquent 
debts, did not report his debts on his security clearance application, and violated 
security rules. This conduct raises questions about his judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to comply with rules and regulations. In requesting an 
administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, 
he failed to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
financial circumstances, and his judgment and reliability. He did not adequately 
articulate his positions and other reasons for his security violations, and to provide facts 
to mitigate the financial and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
 In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence to establish that he paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent accounts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documents and details to explain his 
finances. The record does not provide information to mitigate the security violations and 
his failure to list his debts on the security application. Applicant’s failure to appropriately 
manage his finances and resolve financial issues, his security violations, and failure to 
list his debts indicates that he may not adequately safeguard classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
personal conduct.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
