1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           -------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 17-02629 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
02/14/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant failed to mitigate security concern raised by 
her problematic financial history. She did, however, mitigate the security concern raised 
by her personal conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on December 31, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On August 24, 2017, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
2 
 
the action under the security guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations 
and Guideline E for personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 
2017, and requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On October 30, 2017, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on the same day. She was given thirty days  
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on November 7, 2017. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were eight items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Exhibits 1 through 3, and 5 through 8 are admitted 
into evidence without objection. Exhibit 4 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the May 2017 background investigation. The 
ROI is not authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.3 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro se applicant’s failure to respond 
to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a knowing and voluntary waiver of 
the authentication requirement. The record does not demonstrate that Applicant 
understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also does not 
demonstrate that she understood the implications of waiving an objection to the 
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, GE 4 is inadmissible, and I have not considered the 
information in the ROI.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 25 years old, a high school graduate, who has never married and has 
no children. Since February 2015, she has worked for a defense contractor.4 
 
                                                          
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
4 GE 3.  
 
3 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant has 25 delinquent debts totaling 
$17,905, of which $11,868 are medical accounts.5 Applicant admitted all but seven of 
those debts.6 There is, however, record support for those denied debts.7 Many of these 
debts have been delinquent for several years and remain so today.8   
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
the SOR debts in her security clearance application. Applicant denied that she 
deliberately failed to disclose her financial delinquencies. She claims that she told the 
investigator that she was not sure what was on her credit report but that she was in debt 
for breaking her lease and for unpaid emergency room bills. She also explained that in 
August 2013 her employer cut back on her hours, and her grandmother and other family 
members (unidentified) passed away. Applicant also stated that she has not had a good 
paying job to begin making payments on her indebtedness.9   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”11 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
                                                          
5 GE 1.  
 
6 GE 2. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, f, j, r through t, and v.   
 
7 GE 5, pp. 5, 11; GE 6, p. 2; GE 8, pp. 3, 15.  
 
8 See, e.g., GE 6.  
 
9 GE 2, pp. 5, 10, 13.  
 
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
4 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19 
 
     Discussion 
  
Guideline F  -  Financial Considerations  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,20 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.21 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
21 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Facts admitted by an applicant in an answer to a SOR require no further proof by 
the Government.22 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a 
problematic financial history, as alleged. This raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and (c).  The next inquiry is whether any potentially mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Although Applicant’s delinquencies go back several years, they persist as 
delinquencies today.  Thus, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The record shows no good-faith 
efforts by Applicant to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. Thus, 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant claims that in 2013 her employer cut back on her hours and that her 
grandmother and other family members died, factors that led to her indebtedness. In 
addition, the vast majority of Applicant’s delinquencies are for medical debts, which of 
their very nature are likely caused by circumstances largely, if not wholly, beyond her 
control. The Government has no evidence to rebut those circumstances. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies, leaving open an inquiry into whether Applicant acted responsibly under 
those circumstances to address her indebtedness. Unfortunately, Applicant has not 
offered any evidence that she took any steps at all to address her indebtedness. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply.  
  
                                                          
22 ISCR Case No. 94-1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995) (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR 
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 4 and n.1 
(App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995) (“[a]n applicant’s admissions, whether testimonial or written, can provide a legal 
basis for an Administrative Judge’s findings”). 
 
6 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
 In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances.23 Under Guideline E for 
personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.”24 A statement is false or dishonest when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate 
if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the information, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 In this case, the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified her security clearance 
application by deliberately failing to disclose the indebtedness alleged under Guideline F.  
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that she deliberately failed to disclose her 
indebtedness in her security clearance application. She stated that was unsure of what 
was on her credit report. Thus, it appears that Applicant reasonably did not know what 
delinquencies were on her credit report. I conclude that Applicant’s omission of her debts 
on the security clearance application was not deliberate.25  
 
  The evidence on Applicant’s financial condition raises doubts about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due 
consideration to the whole-person concept.26 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant has 
not met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:                   Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
23 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9) (explaining the “whole-person” concept and factors).  
 
24 AG ¶ 15.   
 
25 Moreover, the Government relies on GE 4 to support the allegation that the omission was deliberate. 
But I ruled that GE 4 is inadmissible.  
 
26 See note 23, supra.  
 
7 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E       For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2b:                    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
  
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
