 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01429 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 20, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 18, 2018. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
without objection.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on 
January 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a and admitted ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f. His 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He graduated from high school and earned some 
college credits, but not a degree. He married in 1988 and has two adult children, ages 
32 and 27, and an adult stepchild, age 32. He and his wife do not provide financial 
support to the children.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife is an accountant and has been employed for the past 13 years. 
Her current annual salary is approximately $90,000 annually. Applicant has not had any 
periods of unemployment since 1988. He works for a federal contractor and earns 
approximately $65,000 to $70,000 annually.3  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1996 and his debts were discharged in 
September 2001.4 He explained he and his wife had financial difficulties when she was 
going to school and working. He said they “were in over our heads” financially. He 
estimated they had about $30,000 to $40,000 discharged in bankruptcy, but he had 
difficulty remembering.5  
  
 In approximately 2009 or 2010, Applicant’s father-in-law became sick and his in-
laws moved in with Applicant and his wife. They were paying his in-laws’ bills. His 
father-in-law passed away in 2011. His mother-in-law was able to purchase her own 
house. She has a job and receives social security benefits and medical benefits. She 
received about $20,000 from her husband’s estate. Applicant estimated that he and his 
wife spent about $5,000 to $6,000 to help his in-laws in 2011. He stated his brother-in-
law took about $10,000 of his mother-in-law’s inheritance. He and his wife subsidize her 
and give her $300 to $350 a month.6  
 
 In August 2012, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In Section 26, which required he disclose any 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a demonstrative chart. 
 
2 Tr. 16, 19-22. 
 
3 Tr. 21-22. 
 
4 GE 7. 
 
5 Tr. 22-23. 
 
6 Tr. 24-25, 37-40, 49-50. 
 
3 
problems with his finances, he disclosed three delinquent debts. He disclosed a 
delinquent balance for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a (at the time it was $3,490; it is now 
$4,463). Applicant stated in the e-QIP that it was a credit card that was sold to a debt 
collector. He further stated:  
 
[I] think this is credit card that was $500 credit line. [I] think this is debt 
collection agency that keeps selling this one[.] [I] told them I would pay 
original debt (credit line wasn’t paying $3,000 for $500 debt.7  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in February 2016. He 
was confronted with the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he told the investigator that he did not 
know what the account pertained to. He stated his wife handles all of the bills, and she 
may have information about the account. He would follow up with his spouse, and if it 
was valid he would make arrangements to resolve and pay the account. In his Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant also denied knowing anything about the account, but stated he 
would contact the creditor and make arrangements if necessary. Credit reports from 
September 2012, October 2015 and March 2017, reflect this delinquent debt. At his 
hearing, Applicant stated that he could not confirm or deny the debt, but it is no longer 
listed on his credit report from January 2018. When asked if he paid the original amount 
he said he owed ($500), he stated he did not.8 The debt is unresolved. 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,332). During his February 2016 
background interview, he was confronted with the delinquent debt. He told the 
investigator he believed it was a credit card debt. He stated his wife handles the bills 
and he would follow up with her regarding its status and make arrangements to resolve 
it. Applicant testified this debt was a signature loan he obtained in approximately 2009. 
He was unable to pay it. It remains on all three credit reports. Applicant stated in his 
SOR answer that the creditor refused to work with him to make payment arrangements 
to settle the debt. The creditor wants the full amount. Applicant testified he cannot afford 
to pay the full amount. It remains unresolved.9  
 
 Applicant testified that he was late three times on the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 
1.c (past due $86). It is now current.10 Applicant disclosed the delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 
1.d ($1,156) on his August 2012 e-QIP. He was confronted with the debt in his February 
2016 background interview and said he was going to follow up with his wife to resolve 
and pay it. In his June 2017 answer to the SOR, he stated this debt “fell through the 
cracks” and was still outstanding. He intended to make arrangements to pay it. 
Applicant’s 2018 credit reports shows it was reported as settled for less than the full 
amount in October 2017.11 
                                                          
7 GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 33-38, 43-44; GE 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; AE A, B, C, D. 
 
9 Tr. 40-43; GE 2, 3, 4; AE C; Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. 32; GE 2, 3, 4, 6; AE D. 
 
11 Tr. 30-31, 45-46; GE 2, 3, 4, 5; AE C, D. 
 
4 
 Applicant disclosed on his August 2012 e-Qip the delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($941). The last activity on the account was December 2011. He was confronted with 
the debt during his 2016 background interview. He believed it was a credit card, but did 
not have further information, and he intended to consult his wife to determine its validity 
and arrange to resolve it. In his June 2017 Answer to the SOR, he indicated this debt 
“fell through the cracks” and he was unaware it was still outstanding. He indicated he 
intended to arrange to pay it. Applicant testified he paid the account. He provided a 
copy of a court order from November 2017 dismissing with prejudice a suit by the 
creditor.12 The debt is resolved. 
 
 Applicant was confronted during his February 2016 background interview with 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($304). The last activity on the account was 2012. Applicant told 
the investigator he was unfamiliar with the account, but would discuss it with his wife to 
determine its validity and resolve it. In his June 2017 Answer to the SOR, he admitted 
the debt and said it “fell through the cracks” and he intended to resolve it. He testified 
that he did not pay it because he forgot about it. Applicant paid the account in August 
2017.13 
 
 Applicant testified that he contacted the creditors for his delinquent debts in June 
2017, and they all wanted their money. Applicant has not been saving money to pay his 
delinquent debts, but intended to do so in the future. In 2008, Applicant and his wife 
purchased a home. They make their monthly mortgage payments. Applicant has about 
$100,000 in his 401k pension plan. He does not know if his wife has any investments. 
They do not support their adult children. His wife has student loans that she is paying. 
He has approximately $1,500 to $2,000 in the bank. He owns a 2013 truck and a 2017 
car. His wife manages their finances. He does not know if they have a budget, but 
presumes his wife keeps one.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
12 Tr. 27-30, 32, 46-47; GE 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; AE F. 
 
13 Tr. 25-26; GE 2, 3, 4; AE E.  
 
14 Tr. 41, 48-49, 50-51, 53. 
 
5 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant began having financial problems in 2011. He had numerous delinquent 
debts that he was unwilling or unable to resolve until recently. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant disclosed the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.e on his 2012 
e-QIP. During his 2016 background interview he stated that he was unfamiliar with 
these debts and others because his wife handled the finances, but said he would 
discuss them with her and resolve them if they were valid. In his Answer to the SOR, he 
denied SOR ¶ 1.a indicating he was unfamiliar with it. He said he was unable to pay 
SOR ¶ 1.b because the creditor would not agree to a payment arrangement. SOR ¶ 1.e 
 
7 
was resolved in November 2017. Applicant brought current the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. He 
paid or settled the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f, but not until after he received the SOR, 
despite them being brought to his attention during his background interview. Applicant 
has not resolved the two largest debts. I cannot find that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. His almost five year delay in paying some of his delinquent debts cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period in 2009 and 2010 when he 
and his wife were caring for her parents. They incurred extra financial responsibilities 
and expended about $6,000 to help his in-laws get settled. After his father-in-law 
passed away in 2011, his mother-in-law found a place to live. Applicant estimated they 
continue to subsidize her with about $300 to $350 a month. These were conditions 
beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. In 2012, Applicant disclosed three 
delinquent debts on his e-QIP. The two largest remain unresolved. He was also 
confronted with other delinquent debts during his background interview in 2016. It has 
been five years since Applicant helped his in-laws. He addressed the small debts after 
he received the SOR. He and his wife earn approximately $160,000. He has not 
resolved the two large debts, one that he disclose on his 2012 e-QIP. Applicant 
provided little insight as why he failed to timely pay his delinquent debts or resolve the 
large one he admitted he owed. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 No evidence was submitted that Applicant is or has received financial counseling. 
There are not clear indications his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply.  
 
 I am unable to conclude that Applicant initiated and is adhering to good faith 
efforts to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. Applicant has resolved the 
past due debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. However despite being made aware during his background 
interview of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, many that were years old, he did 
not take action to resolve them until after he received the SOR. This does not constitute 
a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors. The two largest debts remain 
unresolved. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant denied ¶ 1.a in his answer to the SOR; a debt he disclosed in his 2012 
e-QIP. In the e-QIP, he indicated he did not want to pay the larger amount owed on 
what he claimed was a $500 debt. He testified he has not paid the $500 or any amount 
on the debt. He has not provided any evidence regarding this debt to substantiate his 
dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
8 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. Although 
the amount owed is relatively small, Applicant has had years to address the problem 
and failed to do so. He paid some of the smaller debts, but not until after he received 
the SOR, even though he had been aware they were a trustworthiness concern for 
more than a year. Applicant does not have a reliable financial track record. Despite 
having the time and the means to resolve his delinquent debts, he failed to pay the two 
largest debts. I have concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
I find Applicant’s conduct raises questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability 
for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:   For Applicant  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
