 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01062 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 21, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On May 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On 
June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued on or 
after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
  On August 4, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
decision based on the written record in lieu of hearing. On August 22, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He did not provide a response to the FORM, 
object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Government Exhibits 
(Items) 1 through 7 are admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on 
December 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence, including Applicant's admissions, I 
make the following findings of fact: Applicant is 61 years old, and he was married in 
1986 and divorced in 2005. He has a 30 year-old son, and a 36 year-old step-child. He 
completed some college courses, but did not earn a degree. Since August 2015, he has 
been employed by a federal contractor as a materials inventory coordinator. (Items 2 
and 3)  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file federal and state income tax returns 
for tax year 2014. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.) He owes about $4,000 in delinquent federal 
taxes for tax years 2013 and 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) He also owes about $3,449 for a state 
tax lien that was filed against him in 2017. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) Applicant admitted all of these 
tax allegations in his response to the SOR. He did not provide any explanation or any 
supporting documents with his SOR response. The remaining allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
through 1.j), allege consumer accounts that have either been charged off as bad debts 
or referred for collection. He admitted all of these allegations in his response as well. 
The combined amount of delinquent debt cited in the SOR totals approximately 
$16,063. (Items 1 and 2) 
 
Applicant listed in the September 2015 SCA that he did not have enough 
withheld from his pay for tax years 2013 and 2014. He disclosed that the unpaid taxes 
would be paid by funds withheld from his future tax refunds. He also listed two unpaid 
credit card accounts under the financial section of the SCA. The combined credit card 
amount totaled $5,000. Applicant claimed that he tried unsuccessfully to make 
affordable payment arrangements with the creditors. He listed that his financial 
problems developed after he was unemployed and then subsequently employed with 
lower wages. Applicant was fired by his employer for cause in November 2013, after he 
had worked for this employer for nine years. He was unemployed for the next three 
months, and he started working for another employer in February 2014. He worked 
continuously until April 2015. He left this employment in April 2015 to work for his 
current employer, but he also listed a three month period of unemployment between 
jobs. (Items 3 and 5) 
 
The DOD CAF sent Applicant Interrogatories in January 2017. He was asked to 
provide the current status of his unpaid federal taxes, state taxes, and consumer debts. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant listed in his February 2017 response that the current status of all debts were 
that they were unpaid. He also listed that he was not making payments on any of his 
past due accounts. In addition, he disclosed a new adverse financial account in his 
response. Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS) that showed he 
was paying $800 per month for the financial support of his fiancé and her son in the 
Philippines. His monthly remainder was $50. He did not include any payment towards 
his delinquent debts on the PFS. (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
  
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty beginning in November 2013 following 
his termination from employment. Thereafter, he claimed that his salary with other 
employers was significantly less than what he had been making with his previous 
employer. He filed his federal and state tax returns, but he did not pay the outstanding 
taxes. He did not correct his tax withholding for tax years 2013 and 2014. He has 
 
5 
 
 
accumulated delinquent tax and consumer debts, which are currently unresolved. There 
is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts, and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those 
arrangements.  
   
 Applicant did not provide an explanation for his failure to pay or make 
arrangements to pay his outstanding federal and state taxes. There is no evidence that 
he has made contact with his creditors, or that he made any effort to repay even the 
smallest delinquent debt. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control, 
since his job loss was due to his conduct that resulted in the termination. There is no 
evidence he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has been paying his delinquent federal and state taxes. There is 
no evidence that Applicant has contacted his state to resolve his state lien, or that he 
has contacted any other creditor to make payment arrangements for his outstanding 
consumer debt. AG ¶ 20(c), (d), and (g) do not apply.  
 
  
 
6 
 
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy his financial obligations for 
several years due to loss of employment and lower wages. There is no showing by 
Applicant of any effort to pay, legitimately dispute, or otherwise resolve any of the 
financial security concerns. He has not articulated a plan of how he intends to repay 
these debts. Applicant chose not to submit any response or supporting documentation 
within 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s good judgment, reliability as well as eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance. Because protection of the national interest is the principle focus of 
these adjudications, any unresolved doubts must be resolved against the granting of 
eligibility to classified information.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
