 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-01947 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 4, 2016. On 
August 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 6, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on September 20, 2017. On September 21, 2017, a complete copy of the file of 
 
 2
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on October 5, 2017, and did not submit a response. 
The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2018.  
 
 The FORM included Item 4, a summary of an enhanced subject interview (ESI) 
conducted on March 28, 2017. The ESI was not authenticated as required by Directive 
¶E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on 
the accuracy of the ESI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; 
or object to consideration of the ESI on the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant 
submitted a response to the FORM but did not comment on the accuracy or completeness 
of the ESI summary, nor did he object to it. I conclude that he waived any objections to 
the ESI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they 
are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the 
Directive.1   
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.cc. His admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old medical support assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2016, and he requires a security clearance for this employment. 
He has been married since October 2009 and is the stepfather of one son. Applicant has 
attended some community college. 
 
In approximately July 2011, Applicant was diagnosed with a chronic autoimmune 
disease, which directly affects his ability to keep gainful employment. He was unemployed 
from March 2007 to October 2007, July 2011 to September 2014, and from June 2015 to 
January 2016. During these periods of unemployment, he also lost his health insurance 
coverage. Eventually, he received Social Security disability payments. 
 
The SOR alleged 29 debts totaling $36,206. SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d. to 1.f., 1.j.  to 
1.m., 1.q. to 1.t., and 1.w. to 1.bb. are all medical bills. SOR ¶ 1.c. is a debt related to a 
rental property. SOR ¶¶ 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., and 1.v. are all delinquent 
credit card or personal loan debts. SOR ¶¶ 1.u. and 1.c. are delinquent utility bills (Items 
5 and 6). 
 
In March 2017, Applicant told the Government investigator that over the years he 
had lost track of all of his debts and was unable to attempt to pay them. At that time, he 
was working on resolving some of his debts, and he would set up payment arrangements 
by April or May 2017 for other debts (Item 4 at 8 and 12). In his Answer (Item 2), Applicant 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016).  
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security application (Item 3) unless otherwise 
indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
indicated he had started to take action toward his delinquent debts, and he intended to 
continue to make payment arrangements with his debt collectors.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”3 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”4 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”6 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
                                                          
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4 Egan at 527.S 
 
5 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
6 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 4
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”8 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.9 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.11 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”12 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
Analysis 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.14  
 
 
                                                          
 
8 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 5
 Applicant’s admissions and his credit reports establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of 
not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Many of Applicant’s debts became delinquent 
between 2011 and 2012; however, the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.u. became 
delinquent in 2015.  
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Despite the lack of details in the record, I find 
that Applicant’s periods of unemployment and medical expenses were circumstances 
beyond his control. However, Applicant did not meet his burden to establish that he acted 
responsibly to address his unpaid debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant has made 
payments toward the alleged debts.  
 
I considered that Applicant has experienced financial and medical setbacks, and 
that he is not required to be debt-free in order to qualify for a security clearance.15 
However, Applicant has not provided proof of payments made toward his delinquent 
debts. Moreover, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish that he acted 
responsibly to address his debt, especially during the periods when he was gainfully 
employed. Thus, I cannot conclude that Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F concerns 
at this time.  
 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 15-02903 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (An applicant does not have to be debt-free in 
order to qualify for a security clearance. Rather, all that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan). 
 
 6
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his failure to pay his delinquent debts. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the 
United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.cc.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
