 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00690 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 23, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 23, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). (Item 5.) On April 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.)  On 
July 14, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 17, 2017, and received by him on July 29, 2017.  The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the FORM on August 16, 2017, and the documents are marked 
and admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibit A.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 9, and they are admitted into evidence, hereinafter referenced as Government 
Exhibits 1 through 9.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He has a Bachelor’s degree.  He is employed with a 
defense contractor as a Case Liaison.   He is applying for a security clearance in 
connection with his employment. Applicant began working for his current employer in 
November 2015.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified nine delinquent debts totaling in excess of $85,000.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  
Applicant denies each of the delinquent accounts listed in in the SOR.  (Government 
Exhibit 4.)  Credit Reports of Applicant dated January 7, 2016; December 28, 2016; and 
July 14, 2017; confirm the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 6, 7, 
and 8.) 
      
Most of the delinquent debts set for in the SOR are student loan accounts.  There 
are also two delinquent medical debts.  Applicant states that has hired a law firm to help 
him get the delinquent debts removed from his credit reports.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
Applicant stated that when the debts became delinquent, the creditor sent the notices to 
his parents’ house.  He states that he consolidated the student loan accounts in early 
2016, and started paying $175 monthly.  (Government Exhibit 9.)  The record is not 
clear as to why he stopped making the payments.   
 
Applicant’s most recent credit report shows that two of Applicant’s student loans 
are in deferment.  He also has two that are about 90 days past due with balances of 
 
3 
 
about $45,000 and $33,000.  He also has one student loan that is in collection for the 
amount of about $4,170.  (Government Exhibit 6.)   
 
Applicant submitted a response to the FORM, which includes what he 
characterizes as a loan repayment plan dated July 30, 2017, indicating that his first 
payment was scheduled to start on September 2017, in the amount of $40.47.  A 
second student loan repayment plan for another delinquent student loan shows that 
those payments were to start on September 11, 2017, in the amount of $22.02.  
Applicant provided another document indicating that he had two student loans totaling 
$8,831.26.  This information is inconsistent with what is set forth in his credit reports.  
None of the information submitted by the Applicant has been explained or can be 
deciphered.  Applicant has hired a credit counseling company to assist him with 
resolving the debt, and budgeting his finances.  He states that he now feels more 
comfortable about being able to satisfy his loans earlier and more efficiently.  However, 
there is no evidence in the record to show that Applicant has made even one payment 
toward the payment plans he presented nor does he explain how these payment plans 
are relevant to the debts listed in the SOR.     
 
 The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1.a.  A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $37,141.  The account remains outstanding.    
 
 1.b. A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $27,517.  The account remains outstanding.  
 
 1.c.  A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $8,342.  The account remains outstanding.    
 
 1.d. A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $6,409.  The account remains owing.  
 
 1.e. A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $4,158.  The account remains owing.  
 
1.f.   A delinquent student loan account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $740.  The account remains outstanding.   
 
 1.g.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $668.  The account remains outstanding.     
 
 1.h.  A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $100.  The account remains outstanding. 
   
 1.i.  A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$65.   The account remains owing. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted several documents that indicate that a specific payment plan 
was to begin regarding two of his student loans.  The other delinquent debts in the SOR 
were not addressed.  There is no further explanation given.  Given the complexity of 
these debts, more explanation is necessary to understand the proper application of the 
documents provided. Applicant has failed to provide any further evidence to support the 
fact that his delinquent debts are either paid or being paid.  The record remains void of 
sufficient mitigation. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG.  In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has delinquent student loans that have not been resolved.  He has 
recently indicated that he has set up payment arrangements to resolve the debts.  
However, there is no evidence provided to show that he has started or followed the 
payment plans to resolve the debt.  Other than hiring a credit counseling firm to assist 
him, there is no evidence in the record to prove that he has even made one payment 
toward resolving the debt outlined in the SOR.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.    
 
 
 
6 
 
            Assuming Applicant had some difficulties after college, finding employment, the 
following condition is arguably applicable.  AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns. I considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant incurred student loan debt that became delinquent because he did not 
or could not pay the loans.  Under the particular circumstances here, Applicant has 
failed to establish that he acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts.  
Applicant has not provided evidence to show that he has paid any of his delinquent debt 
nor has he demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  He has clearly not 
demonstrated that his current financial problems are under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  There is no information to explain what, if 
anything, has negatively impacted Applicant’s financial situation.  Furthermore, 
Applicant has not demonstrated that he is financially responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
