 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01736 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
A``pplicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2017, and she elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
September 19, 2017. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not object to the Government's evidence, which are identified as Items 1 
through 5, and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant submitted documents, which 
were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though D. There was no objection, and they 
were admitted into evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h-1.w. She 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g. Her admissions are incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She attended college, but did not earn a degree. She 
has never been married. She has a 19-year-old child. She disclosed on her June 2016 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that she has lived with 
her parents since 1996. She has worked for her employer, a federal contractor, since 
2005.2 
 
 On her e-QIP, under Section 26 regarding her financial record, Applicant 
disclosed she had student loans that were in deferment that she is unable to pay at this 
time. She also disclosed she had unpaid hospital and medical bills from 2013 and 2014. 
She noted she had frequent hospital stays during this time, and has a chronic illness 
that causes her to have outpatient procedures.3  
 
 In February 2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. 
During the interview she was confronted with the debts alleged in the SOR, including 
her numerous medical debts and others. She acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a from 
April 2015 was likely for an inpatient hospital stay. She acknowledged that the other 
medical debts were likely related to her hospital stays, but she did not have specific 
knowledge of each individual debt. She indicated to the investigator that she would 
contact the hospital and arrange a payment plan. The debts alleged in the SOR are 
supported by credit reports from July 2016 and May 2017, and Applicant’s admissions. 
 
 In Applicant’s July 2017 answer to the SOR, she stated that her medical debts 
were with a collection company. On June 16, 2017, after receipt of the SOR, she 
contacted the collection company to discuss payment arrangements. The company 
agreed to consolidate the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e, and 1.i-1.v 
(total balance is approximately $37,003). She agreed to pay $20 biweekly and the 
payments would be applied toward the oldest debts first. She made the two $20 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
3 
payments in June 2017. In her October 2017 FORM response, she provided proof she 
made one additional $20 payment in August 2017, but was unable to make any more 
payments due to household expenses.4 These debts are unresolved. 
 
 Applicant admitted she owed the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.f ($917). She 
stated that in July 2017, she contacted the creditor and was advised the debt included 
nonpayment for a bill and the cost of equipment that was not returned. She was told that 
if she returned the equipment, the amount owed would be reduced. She stated in her 
answer that she was admitted to the hospital in December 2012 and had multiple 
hospital stays until May 2013. She was renting an apartment, and her friends had to 
move her belongings from her apartment to her mother’s residence. She has been 
unable to locate some of her belongings. Applicant indicated on her e-QIP that she has 
lived at her mother’s residence since 1996. She did not list any other places of 
residence. She stated in her answer that she was going to make a $20 payment for the 
debt in July 2017. No documentation of a payment was provided. In her FORM 
response, she stated she was unable to find the equipment. No other information was 
provided.5 The debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($762) and 1.g ($762). I 
conclude they are likely duplicates and find in her favor for SOR ¶ 1.g. She stated the 
creditor said it did not show an account in the amount for $762 in their system. Applicant 
did not provide documentary evidence of what actions she has taken to dispute the 
debt. Credit reports from June 2016 and May 2017 show this debt was charged off in 
2013.6 It remains unresolved.  
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($707). It was charged off in 
approximately December 2013. Applicant was confronted with the debt during her 
February 2017 interview. She contacted the creditor after receiving the SOR and 
arranged a payment plan that was to commence in July 2017. She is to make payments 
of $23 a month. She provided proof that she made payments in July, August, 
September, and October 2017. She is resolving this debt.7 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.w ($796). It was charged off in 2010. 
Applicant was confronted with the debt during her February 2017 interview. She 
contacted the creditor after receiving the SOR and arranged a payment plan that was to 
commence in July 2017. She is to make payments of $10 a month. She provided proof 
that she made payments in July, August, September, and October 2017. She is 
resolving this debt.8 
 
                                                          
4 Item 1; AE A, B. 
 
5 Item 1; AE A. 
 
6 Item 1; AE A. 
 
7 Items 1, 3, 4, 5; AE A, C. 
 
8 Items 1, 3, 4, 5; AE A, D. 
 
4 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she is receiving or has received financial 
counseling. She did not provide a budget or information about her current finances. She 
did not provide information about why she failed to address her debts until after 
receiving the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts from at least 2010 that she is unwilling or unable 
to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
6 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant disclosed that she had a chronic medical condition and that she was 
hospitalized in 2013 and 2014. She has recurring medical issues. When confronted with 
her medical and other delinquent debts during her background interview, she 
acknowledged she owed the debts but did not know the specifics. She indicated at that 
time she would contact the hospital and make payment arrangements. She did not take 
action until after she received the SOR. She failed to follow through on her payment 
plan for her medical debts and other debts. She is making minimal monthly payments 
on two of her delinquent debts. She did not provide information about her current 
finances. Applicant’s past inaction and disregard for her financial obligations is an 
indication of her ongoing financial problems. I am unable to conclude future financial 
problem are unlikely to recur. Her behavior casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant indicated she has a chronic medical condition and had several hospital 
stays and procedures in 2013 and 2104. It is unknown whether she had medical 
insurance or the status of her finances at the time or subsequently. Minimal information 
was provided. Her medical issues were beyond her control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), it requires Applicant to have acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
There is no evidence that she has done so. It is unlikely that Applicant was unaware 
that she had numerous medical bills. She was confronted with them and her other 
delinquent debts during her interview. There is scant evidence that she has done 
anything regarding her delinquent debts until after she received the SOR. Even then, 
her actions are minimal. She failed to follow through on her $20 biweekly payment plan 
for the medical debts that were consolidated. Applicant did not act responsibly. AG ¶ 
20(b) has minimal application.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling and there 
are not clear indications her financial problems are being resolved or under control. I 
cannot find that Applicant’s contact with creditors after receiving the SOR to make 
payment arrangements constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors. AG ¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
7 
 Applicant stated in her answer to the SOR that she disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.g. I have found in her favor on one debt due to duplication. The debt was 
charged off in 2013. She failed to provide sufficient evidence as to the basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt and she failed to provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. She has been steadily employed since at least 2005. I 
have considered she has a chronic medical conditions that required hospital stays and 
medical attention. Applicant was aware of her delinquent medical debts and other debts, 
but has taken minimal action to resolve them. Despite agreeing to a payment plan for 
her consolidated medical debts, she made only three $20 payments. She provided 
insufficient evidence regarding her finances. Applicant does not have a reliable financial 
track record. Concerns remain about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.i-1.v:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.w:   For Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
