 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-00295 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 2, 2015. 
On March 25, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.1  
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date.2  
 
 Applicant’s initial Answer to the SOR, submitted on April 20, 2017, was 
incomplete. He submitted another Answer on June 6, 2017, in which he waived his right 
to a hearing. He changed his mind and requested a hearing on August 24, 2017. The 
case was assigned to me on October 16, 2017. On October 26, 2017, a notice of 
hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for November 15, 2017. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I held the 
record open until December 1, 2017, to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional documentation. He timely submitted AE C through AE F, which were admitted 
without objection. Based on information in his submissions, I held the record open again 
until December 22, 2017, but Applicant submitted no new documents, and the record 
closed. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 9, 2017.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.k, and 1.l. He denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He served on active duty in the United States Navy for 
21 years, from October 1991 to September 2012. He retired as a chief petty officer (E-
7).3 (GE 1; AE E, AE F) After retiring, he attended college full-time. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 2014, and his bachelor’s degree in 2015. He was largely 
unemployed during this period. (Tr. 61) Since October 2015, he has been employed full-
time in the defense industry. He has worked for his current employer, a large defense 
contractor, since March 2017. He works in information technology. (Tr. 60-67; GE 1) 
Applicant held a clearance in the Navy, most recently renewed in 2012. (GE 1) 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant received a copy of the new AGs with the Government’s discovery package, and I provided 
Applicant a copy of the new AGs at the start of the hearing. (Tr. 10-11; Hearing Exhibit I)  
 
3 During his Navy career, Applicant was awarded the Navy & Marine Corps Commendation Medal, the 
Navy & Marine Corps Achievement Medal, several Good Conduct Medals, numerous unit commendations 
and ribbons, and he received various service medals and deployment ribbons. (AE E, AE F, AE G) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant married his wife in 1998.4 They separated in September 2005. (Tr. 35; 
AE A) Applicant has two grown sons (ages 24 and 22). They are the product of a prior 
relationship, though they regard Applicant’s wife as their stepmother. Applicant has one 
daughter (age 18) with his wife. His youngest daughter, (age 12), is the product of a 
subsequent relationship. (Tr. 35, 83-86; GE 1)  
 
 Although they have lived apart for many years, Applicant and his wife did not sign 
a separation agreement until November 2016. He filed for divorce in February 2017. 
(AE A) Divorce was to be finalized at a December 2017 hearing. (Tr. 41-42; AE H) I held 
the record open so Applicant could provide corroborating documentation but he did not 
do so. 
 
 Applicant attributed his overall financial status, and many of his SOR debts, to his 
marital situation, and to his wife. He testified that his financial troubles began many 
years ago, when he was in the Navy. He was often deployed away from home. On the 
one hand, this helped his financial situation, because he received sea duty pay and at 
times hazardous duty pay, of up to an extra $525 a month. (Tr. 34, 73-74) However, he 
testified that his wife would often run up bills and expenses during his deployments. 
When he was not deployed, he did not receive extra pay, so it was more difficult to pay 
expenses. (Tr. 34) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant was issued an SOR by the Department of the 
Navy Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF), alleging a security concern about his 
finances. In considering his response, adjudicators found that:  
 
 [Applicant] knows his finances are his responsibility but he allowed his 
wife to pay the bills. It was difficult to pay the bills while on sea duty. From 
March 2004 to the present, [Applicant] and his wife have been separated 
and his wife did not care about paying the bills. [Applicant] was trying to 
maintain the house and children. He is currently trying to clean up his 
credit. He has refinanced his house and paid several bills off.5  
 
The DON CAF granted Applicant’s clearance, but he was “strongly cautioned that 
receipt of any derogatory information, especially of a [similar nature], will be cause for 
immediate reconsideration.” (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant disclosed several delinquent debts on his SCA. He largely attributed 
them to his wife, who he said “opened up several credit cards and took out a student 
loan in my name” without his approval after they were separated. (GE 1 at 39-44) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a is a past-due mortgage. The account concerns the home that he and 
his wife bought together, and lived in until they separated. Applicant’s credit reports all 
                                                          
4 Applicant testified, and reported on his SCA, that he married his wife in August 1998. (Tr. 33; GE 1 at 
20) His divorce complaint reflects his wedding date as being in August 1997. (AE A) 
 
5 GE 4 
 
4 
 
 
indicate that the mortgage account was opened in November 2006. (GE 2, GE 3, GE 5; 
AE B) By that time, Applicant and his wife were living separately, according to his 
testimony. (Tr. 45-47)6 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, and acknowledged ownership of 
the home. However, he said his wife was living there, and had assumed responsibility 
for paying the mortgage, as shown in the separation agreement.7 A recent credit report 
showed that the account was no longer past due. (Tr. 70-71, 92-93; AE B)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,590) is a charged-off credit card account. Applicant admitted the 
allegation, and it is on his credit reports. However, the separation agreement 
establishes that his wife is responsible for the account, as the Government conceded. 
(Tr. 38-39, 91-92; AE B; GE 3, GE 5) 
  
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.c, a $1,124 electric bill in collection. (GE 5) He 
asserted that the bill was not his since it was in his roommate’s name. He also said that 
the electric bill for his current home is paid by his landlord. He provided no 
documentation either to support his testimony or to establish that he has made efforts to 
resolve this debt. It is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.d, a $690 charged-off credit card. (GE 2, GE 3, GE 
5; AE B) He said he had an agreement to pay $100 towards the debt each month. He 
provided no corroborating documentation of any payments. It is unresolved. (Tr. 48-50)  
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($690) and 1.f ($395) but also said he thought 
they were credit cards that his wife opened in his name. He said he contacted the 
creditor for ¶ 1.e, but was unable to verify the account. (Tr. 50-51) Both are listed on 
Applicant’s credit reports (GE 2, GE 3, GE 5). He provided no documentation to rebut 
this evidence or to establish his efforts to pay the debts. They are unresolved.  
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.g (a $210 cable bill) (GE 2, GE 5) He said he had 
made recent payments of $79 and $46 on the account, and was unaware that the 
account was delinquent, since he still has an account with the creditor. (Tr. 52-54). He 
provided no corroborating documentation of any payments. It is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i, both alleged as delinquent accounts. (GE 
2) However, the Government conceded that no ongoing delinquency was shown, so 
these accounts are resolved. (Tr. 54-56) Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.j (a $69 credit card 
bill). Applicant said it was no longer on his credit report, but he also said he had paid it. 
He provided no supporting documentation. It is unresolved. (Tr. 56-57) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.k is for $210 in overdue bridge tolls. (GE 2) Applicant asserted that he 
had paid the account. He said that he had recently renewed license plate tags on his 
                                                          
6 This discrepancy was not clarified at hearing, though it is possible that Applicant’s wife re-financed the 
mortgage with another lender, as he suggested. (Tr. 45-47) 
 
7 AE A at page 5 of Separation Agreement.  
 
 
5 
 
 
car, which he said he would not have been allowed to do if he had outstanding tolls. (Tr. 
57-58) He provided no corroborating documentation.  
 
 Applicant retained a debt consolidation law firm to help him clean up his credit. 
He pays them $120 a month. He says they monitor his credit and work to have accounts 
removed from his credit report that have been closed or are not his responsibility. (Tr. 
74-75; GE 1 at 38; AE C)  
 
Applicant testified that his finances are improving now that he has found steady, 
full-time work. Applicant makes $25 an hour. He earns a $52,000 annual salary. He 
estimated that he makes about $2,800 a month. He puts $200 a month into a company 
401(k) plan. He pays $928 in child support for his two daughters, as well as medical 
insurance. Those expenses are taken out of Applicant’s Navy pension. (Tr. 67-68)  
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor attested to Applicant’s trustworthiness, integrity, 
“can do” attitude, and professional performance in his field. Applicant also provided the 
witness useful guidance that advanced his own naval career. Another co-worker stated 
that Applicant is efficient, detail-oriented, trustworthy, and works well to deadline. He 
handles classified information appropriately. Applicant also brings his professional skills 
to his church through volunteer work. (AE D) When he was in the Navy, Applicant 
consistently achieved high ratings, was regarded as an outstanding manager and 
effective leader, and was recommended for promotion. (AE F) 
  
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”8 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s credit reports reflect that he has incurred numerous unresolved 
delinquent debts over the last several years. “It is well-settled that adverse information 
 
7 
 
 
from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the 
government’s obligations under ¶ E3.1.14 [of the Directive] for pertinent allegations.”9 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are found for Applicant, since no ongoing delinquency is 
alleged. The other SOR allegations are established. Notwithstanding Applicant’s 
denials, the Government has met its burden, and AG ¶¶19 (a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem, and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.b are his wife’s responsibility, as established by their separation 
agreement. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to them. It does not apply to any other debt in the SOR, 
since the remaining debts are established by Applicant’s credit report. 
 
 Applicant did not establish that any of his current debts occurred due to a 
circumstance beyond his control. He also did not establish that he acted reasonably 
under the circumstances. It is not enough for Applicant to assert that his debts are 
largely his wife’s responsibility, or that certain accounts may have dropped off his credit 
report. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s outstanding financial delinquencies are a “continuing course of 
conduct.”10 They are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to establish that the behavior which led to his financial problems happened so 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 11-00046 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2012). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017). 
 
 
8 
 
 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not continue to cast doubt on his current judgment, trustworthiness and 
reliability. On the contrary. Under quite similar circumstances, Applicant was previously 
cautioned by the DONCAF that future financial problems of a similar nature would lead 
to reconsideration of his clearance. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s financial situation, and his attitude towards his debts, are both 
markedly similar to what they were in 2008, when the Government took issue with his 
eligibility for a security clearance. He asserted then, as he does now, that his wife was 
responsible for many of the SOR debts, due to her overspending and poor financial 
management. That may have been true at one point, when he was in the Navy and 
often deployed. But he and his wife have been living separately for many years, though 
they remain married. Applicant repeatedly asserted, then as now, that his wife opened 
up credit cards and other accounts in his name. None of this is documented, or proven. 
 
 The debts remaining in the SOR do not amount to all that much money. But 
Applicant has taken very few concrete steps to accept responsibility for them, or to take 
appropriate action to resolve them. He asserted that several of his debts are being paid, 
yet he provided no documentation of any payments. Applicants are expected to 
document their efforts to pay or otherwise resolve their debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Notwithstanding the limited amount of 
unresolved delinquent debt in this case, the overall picture is of an Applicant who has 
 
9 
 
 
not accepted full responsibility for his debts, and who, despite ample warnings, has not 
taken sufficient steps to resolve them. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.l:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
