 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01050 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 11, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 8, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for December 7, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through U, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. He submitted AE V through BB, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 18, 2017.  
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He retired in 2015 
after 22 years in the U.S. Navy and Navy Reserve. He is a high school graduate with 
courses and certificates attained through the Navy. He is divorced with no children, but 
he treats his ex-wife’s children like they were his own children.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case in 2001. He completed the payments to the trustee, and any remaining 
dischargeable debts were discharged in 2006. He had a side business that was 
adversely affected by an environmental disaster in 2010. Thereafter, he lost his full-time 
job and went through a divorce. He was unable to pay all his bills and a number of debts 
became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges the 2001 through 2006 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case and eight 
delinquent debts totaling about $62,000. Applicant admitted owing all the debts with the 
exception of the $47 unidentified medical debt alleged in SOR 1.h, which he paid. 
 
 Applicant filed a claim with the corporation that caused the environmental 
disaster. He expected to use the proceeds from the claim to pay his debts. The claim 
was denied in February 2017. He then obtained credit counseling to assist him in 
resolving his financial problems. He was advised that bankruptcy was his best 
remaining option.3 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in February 2016. His dischargeable 
debts were discharged in November 2017. He stated that his finances are currently 
stable. He uses what he learned through financial counseling. He is paying his student 
loans, which were not discharged in his bankruptcy.4 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent job 
performance. He is praised for his responsibility, honesty, trustworthiness, work ethic, 
patriotism, reliability, high morals and ethics, loyalty, leadership, dedication, and 
integrity.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-26, 29-30; GE 1, 2; AE C, K, R.  
 
2 Tr. at 26-27, 32-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE D, O, P, S.  
 
3 Tr. at 27-28, 50-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE E, T, U.  
 
4 Tr. at 27-30, 58-60, 85-86; AE F-I, L-N, V-BB. Applicant provided a copy of his federal income tax 
returns from 2014 and 2015. He claimed his ex-wife’s daughter as a dependent and listed her as his 
“Daughter.” He also claimed a child tax credit for her. She lived with him and he supported her, so he may 
have been able to claim her as a non-relative dependent, but he could not claim the child tax credit. See 
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p972.pdf. His returns were prepared by a tax professional. I am convinced 
Applicant was unaware that he was filing an incorrect return. I further believe the tax preparer was 
incompetent, dishonest, or both. 
 
5 AE I, J. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant had a side business that was adversely affected by an environmental 
disaster in 2010. Thereafter, he lost his full-time job and went through a divorce. He 
expected to pay his debts from the claim with the corporation that caused the 
environmental disaster. When the claim was denied, he followed the advice of his 
financial experts and resolved his dischargeable debts through bankruptcy. His finances 
are currently stable, and he is paying his student loans, which were not discharged in 
his bankruptcy. 
 
 I find that Applicant’s financial difficulties were the result of conditions that were 
beyond his control, and that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. They do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His resolution 
of his debts through Chapter 7 bankruptcy does not qualify as a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
However, the bankruptcy provides a clear indication that the problem has been resolved 
and is under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence and 22 years of honorable military service. 
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
