 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01594 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations), but he did not mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E 
(personal conduct) and H (drug involvement and substance misuse). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, F, and H. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 3, 2017, and elected to have the case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on August 31, 2017. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 24, 2017. 
As of November 13, 2017, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
January 16, 2018. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in 
evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was 
unemployed from February 2016 until August 2016, when he began work for his current 
employer. He attended college for a period without earning a degree. He married in 
1994 and divorced in 2012. He has three children.1 
  
 The financial allegations in the SOR include an unpaid judgment for $4,219; a 
$2,730 delinquent debt; and 12 delinquent medical debts. However, the four medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g are not established. The September 2016 
credit report does not report a balance for any of those debts. The eight remaining 
medical debts total $1,670. Those eight debts, the judgment, and the $2,730 debt are all 
listed on a September 2016 credit report.2 
 
 Applicant stated, without supporting documentation, that the judgment was paid 
through garnishment of his wages. He is listed as a co-maker on the $2,730 delinquent 
debt. He indicated the account was used to buy furniture when he was married, and it 
was his ex-wife’s responsibility to pay the debt. He stated the medical debts were for his 
child’s medical treatment and should have been paid by health insurance.3 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana, sometimes on a regular basis, between about 1993 
and May 2016. He would stop for about 60 to 90 days when applying for a new job, 
which was not always successful because he failed a pre-employment drug test in 
2002.4  
 
Applicant intentionally falsified a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) in August 2016, when he failed to disclose his marijuana use. He was 
interviewed for his background investigation in February 2017. He admitted his 
marijuana use. He stated that he did not report his marijuana use on the SF 86 because 
he knew that he would meet with an investigator and he would explain his use then. He 
also stated that he did not think drug use was relevant. He stated that he had not used 
marijuana since about May 2016, and he did not intend to use it in the future because 
he had grown out of it.5 
 
 In response to the SOR allegations under Guidelines E and H, Applicant 
admitted both allegations and added the comments: “I think it should be noted that I 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 5. 
 
2 Items 2, 4, 5. 
 
3 Items 2, 4, 5. 
 
4 Items 2, 5. 
 
5 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
have never been arrested in my life for any reason what so ever.” That statement may 
be correct, but it is somewhat misleading. Applicant was criminally charged with 
displaying a disabled person’s placard when the disabled person (his child) was not in 
the vehicle. He was convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in 2009 after a jury 
trial. His sentence included probation and a fine. Warrants were also issued against 
Applicant in 2010 and 2012 for failure to appear (FTA) to address traffic citations. He 
paid the underlying fines and the warrants were dismissed.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 Items 2, 5. The SOR did not allege the convictions and the warrants. Any matter that was not alleged in 
the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered when putting Applicant’s 
statement in context, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24:   
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition). 
 
 Applicant used marijuana between about 1993 and May 2016. The above 
disqualifying condition is applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
 
5 
 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has used marijuana since May 2016. He 
stated that he did not intend to use it in the future because he had grown out of it. 
However, he stopped smoking marijuana in the past and then resumed. He failed to 
divulge his drug use on his SF 86, and he did not think drug use was relevant. 
Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. His well-established pattern of illegal drug use is not mitigated. AG ¶ 26(a) is 
not applicable, and AG ¶ 26(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
clearance investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his August 2016 SF 86 when he failed to report 
his marijuana use. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant disclosed his marijuana use during his background interview in 
February 2017. It is positive that Applicant revealed his marijuana use in his interview, 
but that cannot be considered a “prompt” correction. Applicant’s conduct continues to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Personal 
conduct concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including delinquent debts. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.g are not established. Those 
allegations are concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 I accept Applicant’s statements that the judgment has been satisfied, his ex-wife 
was supposed to pay the furniture debt, and the medical debts were for his child’s 
medical treatment and should have been paid by health insurance. Any remaining 
financial issues are insufficient to be a security concern and are mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, and H in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns, but he did not mitigate the 
personal conduct and drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.n:   For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
