 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02426 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On March 1, 2017, Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Government Exhibit 3.)  On July 21, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 25, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
August 9, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, were 
 
2 
 
received by Applicant on September 7, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant failed to respond to the 
FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on January 17, 2018.  Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence, and hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 31 years old.  He has a bachelor’s degree.  He is employed by a 
defense contractor as an Application Engineer.  He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment.   He has been working for his current 
employer since April 2011. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2010 to at least 2014.  It also indicates that Applicant has a number of 
delinquent debts and unpaid tax liens that remain outstanding.  Applicant admits each of 
the allegations under this guideline.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated March 24, 
2016; and February 1, 2017, confirm this indebtedness.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.) 
 
The following Federal income tax returns, delinquent debts, and tax liens remain 
owing: 
 
1.a.  Applicant failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through at least 2014, as required by law.  There is no evidence that they have been 
filed. 
 
1.b.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
amount of approximately $14,900.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.c.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $9,417.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.d.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $150.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.e.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $140.  The account remains owing. 
 
 
3 
 
1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $124.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.g. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was place for collection in the 
approximate amount of $77.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a state for a tax lien entered against him in December 
2006 in the approximate amount of $124.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.i.  Applicant is indebted to a state for a tax lien entered against him in May 2006 in the 
approximate amount of $124.  The account remains owing. 
 
1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $129.  The account remains owing. 
 
Applicant has not provided any documentary proof that he has filed the Federal 
income tax returns in question, for tax years 2010 through 2014, or that he has even 
filed his most recent Federal income tax returns.  Applicant has also failed to provide 
any evidence of payments, arrangements to pay, or resolution of the seven delinquent 
debts and two tax liens listed in the SOR.  The record is void of any evidence of 
mitigation. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
  Applicant failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 
through 2014, as required by law.  There is no evidence that Applicant has filed these 
tax returns or even timely contacted the IRS at the time he was required to file each 
return to exercise the option of filing for extensions.  There is nothing in the record to 
show that he has brought his filings current.  The failure to file tax returns suggests that 
Applicant has a problem complying with well-established governmental rules and 
systems.  Tax liability was assessed against him.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  In addition, Applicant is excessively indebted to the 
creditors listed in the SOR.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Applicant provided no information concerning his Federal income tax filings that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is no evidence of any sort to show that he 
has filed the Federal income tax returns in question.  Additionally, in regard to the seven 
 
6 
 
delinquent debts and the two tax liens listed in the SOR, there has been no evidence, 
documentary or otherwise, provided to show that he has done anything to resolve them.  
There is no evidence that he has acted reasonably and responsibly.  His actions 
demonstrate unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
