                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
       -------------------------------------                   )     ISCR  Case No.  17-01387          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
                    For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DoD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2017, and she requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on July 14, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on August 4,
2017. The Government’s case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant relied on
three witnesses (including herself) and seven exhibits. (AEs A-G) The transcript was
received on August 14, 2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, both parties asked to keep the record open to
permit them to check on Applicant’s current sponsorship for a security clearance. While
sponsorship was confirmed by Department Counsel at hearing (Tr. 112-113), the record
was kept open to permit both parties to double-check and submit clarifying information if
necessary. For good cause shown, the parties were granted 14 days to supplement the
record if necessary. Neither party supplemented the record, and based on the information
furnished at hearing, findings are in order that Applicant continues to be sponsored for
her security clearance by her current employer.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent student loans,
exceeding $64,000 in the aggregate. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. She
provided no explanations or claims.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old security information assurance analyst for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant recently married and has no children. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 48) She earned a
bachelor’s degree in mathematics in May 2008 and financed her education with
Sallie/Mae guaranteed loans exceeding $100,000. (GE 1; Tr. 41-43, 48-49, 82-83) She
consolidated her public loans in August 2016 and maintains these loans in current status
2
with a balance of $98,000 and monthly payments of $135. (AEs F-G; Tr. 67) She earned
associate degrees from a nationally accredited private technical institution for profit in
December 2009 and September 2011. She earned a bachelor’s degree in October 2011
from the same institution. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 50-51, 84-88) She financed her education with
private loans. (GEs 1-2 and A-C; Tr.50-51)  Applicant reported no military service.
Applicant has worked for her current employer since November 2010. (GEs 1-2;
Tr. 52-53, 65-66) Between January 2002 and the present, she has worked
contemporaneously as a self-employed network computer technician (less than 20 hours
a week) for a non-DoD firm, and she has worked as a math tutor to supplement her
income. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 51-53)
Applicant’s finances
Before turning to her current private lender for her student loans, Applicant applied
to other private lenders. (AEs A-B; Tr. 64, 86) These other lenders declined to give her a
loan due to her school’s vocational status. Securing student loans from her private lender
of record in July 2012 (AE B), she accumulated over $65,000 in student loan debts while
enrolled in on-line courses with her technical institute between December 2009 and
October 2016. Applicant’s monthly payments on her private loans approximated $800 a
month. (Tr. 42) For several months after completing her studies, she made her scheduled
$800 payments. (Tr. 54, 67) 
Struggling to make both her Sallie Mae and private loan payments, she ceased
making her scheduled private loan payments in 2016 and dropped her payments to $25 a
month for several months while seeking loan consolidation and lower payments from the
lender. (Tr. 44-486, 69-70) After the private lender summarily denied her requests to
lower her payments, she ceased making payments altogether and has made no further
attempts to contact the lender to explore consolidating her four loans with lower monthly
payments. (Tr. 46-48) Applicant’s most recent account summary reports current principal
and interest on the loans of $64,000 in the aggregate and past due balances in excess of
$8,000. (AE E)
 
In 2016, Applicant’s for profit educational institute petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy protection. (AEs C-D) Applicant, in turn, filed a proof of claim in the
bankruptcy in January 2017 seeking reimbursement of her tuition payments totaling
$65,214. (AEs C-D) The lender’s bankruptcy proceeding remains pending with no time
estimates of when the petitioner will receive its discharge, or when and how Applicant’s
claim will be resolved. (Tr. 107) Applicant has no bankruptcy schedules in her possession 
to ascertain whether her private student loan lender filed a proof of claim in her school’s
bankruptcy proceeding, and she has no identifiable access to obtaining them, (Tr. 107-
108)  She  believes that her school is solely responsible for its closing of its facilities to
students. (Tr. 109)
To date, Applicant has received no response from her school’s bankruptcy trustee
or the school itself about the status of her proof of claim. (Tr.  56-57)  Whether her private
3
lender ever filed a proof of claim of its own is unclear. Without documentation of the
school’s bankruptcy petition, included schedules, and dispositions made by the
bankruptcy court on the merits of Applicant’s reimbursement claim, no inferences can be
drawn about Applicant’s prospects for favorable disposition of her claim, or the potential
for available assets for honoring any favorable determination of her claim. 
Conceivably, Applicant’s student loan agreements with her private lender contain
contingency clauses covering loan forgiveness or discharge of Applicant’s loans in
circumstances, where, inter alia, the institution filed for bankruptcy or other legal relief that
adversely affected the value of her educational achievements or lender-borrower
relationships. (Tr. 58-60, 62-63) Possibly, her loan agreements covered any school
closures and other events that precluded the school from fulfilling its educational
commitments to Applicant and her lender. (Tr. 62-63) All of these possibilities are
speculative, though, and cannot be resolved with any degree of factual certainty without
access to Applicant’s loan application and lender approvals. Absent any applicable
forgiveness provisions in her loan agreements, she remains liable to her lender for her
outstanding loans, irrespective of the merits of the claims she has made against her
school in its pending Chapter 7 petition.
At this time, too little is known about Applicant’s payment terms and options with
her private lender to draw any clear inferences about the scope of her payment
responsibilities with her private lender.  Whether she has any financial recourse against
her school cannot be ascertained without copies of her loan agreements and other
information from the school that might provide answers and clarifications of recourse she
could conceivably have against the school and her lender. From the evidence developed
in the record, there is nothing to warrant assigning any lender responsibility for ensuring
Applicant a quality education from the school who received Applicant’s authorized loan
funds from her lender. Asked whether she had any evidence of the Government’s
contributing in any way to the closing of her school, Applicant confirmed that she did not.
(Tr. 107)
Because Applicant did not provide a personal financial statement (covering her
monthly net income, monthly expenses, and any monthly remainder), or other documented 
evidence of discretionary spending available to her, a probative assessment of her
finances cannot be made. As the record stands, there is no evidence of a budget or any
financial counseling to assess her ability to address her outstanding student loan debts.
Character references
Applicant is well-regarded by her mother and step-father who characterized her as
trustworthy and reliable. Her stepfather, who has known Applicant for 20 years, credited
her with being committed to her schooling and ”squeaky clean.” (Tr. 93).  Likewise, her
mother characterized her as devoted to her educational pursuits and trustworthy and
reliable in every way. (Tr. 103-104) Expressing her belief that the Government was
responsible for shutting down Applicant’s school, she conceded that she did not have any
corroborative evidence to support her beliefs. (Tr. 99-101) Based on the evidence
4
produced, responsibility for running out of operating resources and petitioning for Chapter
7 bankruptcy relief lies with Applicant’s school.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, ¶ 2(d)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
5
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds . . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulating delinquent school
loans (four in all) with a private lender exceeding $65,000. These loans remain
delinquent. Applicant’s past efforts to consolidate her loans and reduce the monthly
payments were unsuccessful, Her continuing loan deficiencies warrant the application of
6
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to
satisfy debts;” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her listed student loan debts 
negate the need for any independent proof. See McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th
ed. 2006). Applicant’s delinquent debts are fully documented in her credit reports and
create some initial judgment issues. See ISCR Case No. 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep.
24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles her to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Extenuating circumstances (i.e., lack of sufficient income to cover her private
student loans) have accounted for a good deal of Applicant’s financial problems over
the course of the past several years while she was completing her on-line studies. MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending
practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances,” partially  applies to Applicant’s situation.
Since 2016, Applicant has made no additional payments to her student loan
lender (citing the lender’s unwillingness to work with her) and still hopes to consolidate
her loans with lower monthly payments. Progress to date in addressing these loans,
individually or through her lender’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy is very limited. Because
Applicant did not provide a personal financial statement or other evidence documenting
her net monthly income, monthly expenses, and available income for discretionary
spending) cannot be fully assessed with the information furnished by Applicant. What
can be derived from this record is that her cumulative repayment efforts lack the
strength of sustained purpose to meet the acting responsibly prong of MC ¶ 20(b). See
ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).
Applicant’s corrective steps taken to resolve her delinquent private student loan
debts are not enough to enable her to avail herself of the mitigation benefits of MC ¶
20(d), “the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” And, since she does not dispute her student loans
or delinquent status, she may not avail herself of the benefits of MC ¶ 20(e), “the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
7
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) In Applicant’s case, she has a very limited track record in
addressing her private student loan debts. She has not been in contact with her lender
since she ceased making small payments to the lender in 2016 and has no immediate
plans to resume her monthly payments. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is a mixed one for Applicant. While she is credited for
her honesty, trustworthiness, and reliability by her mother and stepfather, she has
shown only modest progress to date in addressing her private student loan debts
through a combination of trying to work with her lender while pursuing her proof of claim
in her school’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in
addressing her finances reflect modest but insufficient financial responsibility and good
judgment to to credit her with restoring her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to
protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.
Conclusions are warranted that Applicant’s finances are insufficiently stabilized at
this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a-1.d of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the
facts and circumstances of this case  is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
 GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
              Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d                 Against Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
  
10
