 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01539 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 20, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 22, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 14, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.)  On 
July 13, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on July 14, 2017, and received by him on July 20, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant failed to 
 
2 
 
respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 7, and they are 
admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He is married and has three minor children.  He has 
completed some college.  He is employed with a defense contractor as a Shift 
Supervisor.   He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment. 
Applicant began working for his current employer in 2015.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified sixteen delinquent debts totaling in excess of $25,000.  Applicant admits to 
each of the delinquent accounts listed in in the SOR.  Credit Reports of Applicant dated 
July 22, 2016; March 21, 2017; and July 13, 2017; confirm the indebtedness listed in the 
SOR.  (Government Exhibits 4, 5 and 6.)      
 
Applicant failed to explain how he became encumbered with these debts.  There 
is no evidence that he has attempted to satisfy his debts.  Furthermore, there is no 
evidence to show that he has engage in responsible spending, or that he did not spend 
beyond his means.  Applicant states that he has every intention of paying off his debt.  
His plan is to save $3,000 dollars by August, as a buffer in case of emergencies.  He 
then plans to contact his creditors and set up payment plans to start paying off the 
balances.  (Government Exhibit 1.)   
 
The following debts became owing:  
 
1.(a) A delinquent rental account was placed was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $3,967.  The account remains outstanding.    
 
 
3 
 
 1.(b) A delinquent military housing account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,856.  The account remains outstanding.    (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(c) A delinquent medical account for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,660.  The account remains outstanding.    (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(d) A delinquent cable account for an account in the approximate amount of 
$209.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(e) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $200.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
1.(f) A delinquent medical account was placed was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $149.  The account remains outstanding.   (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(g) A judgment was filed against the Applicant in 2015 in the approximate 
amount of $970.  The judgment remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
 1.(h) A judgment was filed against the Applicant in 2012 in the approximate 
amount of $865.  The judgment remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.) 
   
 1.(i) A judgment was filed against the Applicant in 2016 in the approximate 
amount of $1,428.   The judgment remains owing. 
 
 1.(j) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $1,428.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
1.(k) A delinquent account was charged off in the approximate amount of $420.  
The account remains outstanding.   (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(l) A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$817.  The account remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(m) A delinquent medical account for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $179.  The account remains outstanding.  (Answer to SOR.)     
 
 1.(n) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $164. The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 1.(o) A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $52.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
1.(p) Applicant’s wages were garnished by the Department of Education in about 
March 2016 in the approximate amount of $10,505.  This garnishment order has not 
been completed.  (Answer to SOR.)    
 
 
4 
 
 There is no documentation in the record to show that Applicant has done 
anything to resolve this debt.  It would have been helpful for Applicant to have provided  
some evidence and documentation to explain his financial circumstances, namely, how 
they were incurred, and why, what he has done, if anything to remedy the problem, 
including  information about his current financial state of affairs, as well as any budgets 
in place to show that his finances are now in order or are improving.      
 
 A letter of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant from a Shift 
Lieutenant, who is also a friend, coworker, and supervisor, indicates that in his opinion, 
Applicant is a great role model.  Applicant helped to mentor this individual and showed 
him how to handle difficult situations at work. Applicant’s work ethic is described as 
second to none.  He is extremely helpful and is well-liked by all who know him.  He is 
considered to be responsible and trustworthy.  (See attachment to Applicant’s Answer 
to SOR.)     
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He has not 
indicated that he has set up payment arrangements to resolve the debt or that he has 
otherwise settled the debt.  In fact, there is no evidence in the record to prove that he 
 
6 
 
has done anything to resolve his delinquent debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant has failed to explain why he became excessively indebted or what if 
anything he has done to resolve the debt.  Under the particular circumstances here, 
Applicant has failed to establish that he acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to 
his debts.  Applicant has not addressed any of his delinquent debt nor has he 
demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely.  It has not been demonstrated 
that his current financial problems are under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  There is no information to explain what if 
anything has negatively impacted his financial situation.  Applicant has not 
demonstrated that he is financially responsible.          
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
