 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00629 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his continuing 
family connections in Iraq. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On November 11, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 3, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 17, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 22, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on August 24, 2017, setting the hearing for September 19, 2017. On 
that date, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through M into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until October 13, 2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 27, 2017. No post-hearing 
documents were submitted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG, but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq. Those facts are set forth in 
the following: Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Iraq, marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. These documents are included in the record. (Tr. 9-10) The 
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters 
not subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Amendment to SOR 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing and based on the evidence admitted, 
Department Counsel moved to amend Paragraph 1 of the SOR to state as follows: 
 
a. Your brother and mother are citizens and residents of Iraq. 
 
b. Your mother-in-law and four siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Iraq. 
 
Applicant did not object to these amendments, and I granted the motion. The 
record remained open after the hearing in order to give Applicant adequate time in 
which to submit additional evidence pertinent to these amendments. (Tr. 43-44) 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the original SOR. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He was born in Iraq. He attended high school there. He 
never served in the Iraqi army, but from August 2006 to November 2008 he worked as a 
local hire linguist supporting the U.S. forces in Iraq. He was 18 or 19 years old. While 
performing that work, he was not personally threatened by terrorists, nor was his family. 
However, the terrorists considered him and all translators to be traitors and still do. (Tr. 
53-54) 
 
 Based on his work with the U.S. forces, Applicant applied for and was granted a 
visa through the Special Immigrant Visa program for Iraqi and Afghani 
translators/interpreters. In November 2008, he entered the United States on that visa. 
(Tr. 16) In March 2014, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 13)  
 
 Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant returned to Iraq in October 2010. He 
went there for a visit and to marry his wife. He stayed until December 2010 when he 
returned to the United States and worked as a trainer for the Army. (Tr. 55-56; GE 2) In 
September 2012, he went to Iraq for six months and lived with his family. He came back 
to the United States in February 2013 and worked in a factory while waiting for U.S. 
citizenship. (Tr. 56-57; GE 1, GE 2) 
 
 After becoming a citizen in March 2014, Applicant returned to Iraq for a month 
and then went to Turkey.1 He worked in Turkey until February 2015. He then went to 
Iraq until September 2015, where he worked as a translator for a security company, 
before returning to the United States. In January 2016, he started working for a defense 
contractor and deployed to Iraq. He continues to work for the contractor. He was home 
from a deployment at the time of this hearing. (Tr. 15, 35; GE 1, GE 2) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Iraq. His father is deceased. His 
mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She worked for an Iraqi ministry until she retired. 
She receives a small pension. She came to the United States and was in the process of 
obtaining permanent residency, but she decided to return to Iraq after residing in the 
United States for two months. Applicant contacts her every other day or week. (Tr. 26-
28, 36, 61) His mother visited him while he was working in Iraq in September 2017. She 
knows he works as a translator and has worked as a military translator in the past. His 
employer was aware of her visit. While in Iraq, he calls her every two or three days. He 
provides her less than $2,000 a year for financial support. (Tr. 35-39, 60)  
 
 Applicant has two brothers. One brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He 
works for a U.S. aid agency in Iraq. Applicant communicated with him a month ago at a 
holiday. Prior to that, he had not communicated with him for two years. Applicant 
intends to continue communicating with him, but only at holidays. This brother is not 
                                            
1 Applicant’s e-QIP listed his travel to Iraq as being from May 2014 to September 2015. He also 
listed that he worked in Turkey from May 2014 to February 2015. During his personal interview in August 
2016, Applicant disclosed that he was in Turkey from June 2014 to November 2014 for work. The record 
is not consistent, as to some of his travel dates, and dates and places of employment.  
 
 
 
 
4 
aware of Applicant’s work as a translator. The last time Applicant saw his brother was in 
2015, while Applicant was in Iraq. His brother is married and has three children. (Tr. 17-
18, 34, 39)  
 
 Applicant’s other brother is an Iraqi citizen, residing in the United States. He is in 
the process of receiving permanent residency. (Tr. 20-21) His only sister is an Iraqi 
citizen and a U.S. permanent resident. (Tr. 22-24) 
 
  Applicant’s wife is 27 years old and was born in Iraq. She is an Iraqi citizen. She 
graduated from a teaching institute there. (Tr. 52) She came to the United States in 
2016 and resides with Applicant. She is waiting for a permanent resident card. Their 
daughter was born in Iraq, and resides with them. She, too, is waiting for a permanent 
resident card. (Tr. 33; Answer) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She is a housewife. 
She does not know about Applicant’s work as a translator. Applicant’s wife speaks to 
her mother every week. The last time he had personal contact with her was in 2015, 
while he was visiting. (Tr. 24-26) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has seven siblings. Four of them are citizens and residents of 
Iraq. They are students and live with his mother-in-law. His wife communicates with 
them when she calls her mother. (Tr. 41) Applicant has cousins and other members of 
his family who are citizens and residents of Iraq. He contacts them twice a year at 
holidays. (Tr. 30) 
 
 Applicant has retirement accounts in the United States. He does not have any 
property or assets in Iraq. (Tr. 17, 52) 
 
 Applicant submitted recommendation letters attesting to his capabilities and 
contributions as an interpreter and translator. Three U.S. military officers with whom he 
has served stated that Applicant’s language skills, and his knowledge of Iraq and its 
culture, were an invaluable asset to their mission accomplishment. They consider him to 
be extremely responsible and trustworthy. (AE F)   
 
Iraq 
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
pronouncements concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE I, including the 
following: Iraq faces many challenges fueled by sectarian and ethnic divisions. 
Numerous terrorist groups are increasingly active throughout Iraq. The Islamic State of 
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic State) control some of the country’s territory. 
Threats of kidnapping and violence are high, and the Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens that all travel to Iraq should be avoided. Additionally, human-rights related 
problems including disappearances, torture, denial of fair public trial, and limits on 
freedom of speech and expression have been noted. (HE I.) 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant has ongoing and commendable familial connections with his mother 
and brother, who are residents and citizens of Iraq. His in-laws are also citizens and 
 
 
 
 
7 
residents of Iraq, and his wife maintains regular family connections with them. These 
relationships create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because terrorists and insurgents in Iraq may threaten Applicant and his family, as they 
may seek intelligence or engage in behaviors that are hostile to the United States’ 
interests. Applicant’s relationship with his relatives also creates a potential conflict of 
interest between his obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and his 
desire to help family members living in Iraq. The evidence and Applicant’s admissions 
are sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
  
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts of this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) have limited applicability. Applicant and his wife have ongoing 
and regular family relationships and contacts with their parents, siblings, and extended 
family members, who are lifelong residents and citizens of Iraq. He provides financial 
support to his mother, who recently visited him while he was working in Iraq. Although 
Applicant honorably supported the U.S. operations in Iraq between 2004 and 2006, and 
again from early 2016 to the present, he has done so under conditions that he knows 
could place his family members under a continuing heightened risk. He is a loyal and 
dedicated U.S. citizen, but the potential for conflict of interest situations created by his 
family circumstances remain insufficiently mitigated. Applicant is not able to fully meet 
his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives 
who are citizens and residents of Iraq] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
 
 
 
 
8 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States.” Applicant has established some 
connections to the United States under this mitigating condition. In 2008, he immigrated 
to the United States from Iraq, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2014. His wife, child, 
and one brother are citizens of Iraq. They reside in the United States and await 
permanent resident status. His sister is a citizen of Iraq and permanent U.S. resident. 
His financial accounts are located in the United States. Those facts demonstrate some 
connections to the United States. However, Applicant’s frequent visits to Iraq, both prior 
to and after becoming a U.S. citizen, and his recent long deployment for work, 
demonstrate longstanding and substantial commitments to Iraq, the place of his birth 
and upbringing. Applicant has spent about a significant amount of his time in Iraq and 
Turkey since he first came to the United States on a Special Immigrant Visa in 2008  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do 
not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that are 
normal and commendable results of his family situation. There is mitigating evidence 
weighing in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is a mature and 
intelligent erson, who has lived in the United States during the past nine years, at least 
part of the time, and has been a naturalized citizen since 2014. His spouse, child, 
brother, and sister also immigrated from Iraq to the United States, although only his 
sister is a permanent resident. In his employment from 2004 to 2006, and from 2016 to 
the present he has provided direct support to the U.S. armed forces as a linguist. There 
is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the 
United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. Applicant’s colleagues 
assess him as loyal, trustworthy, and responsible.  
 
 
 
 
9 
However, there are significant factors that weigh against granting Applicant a 
security clearance at present. First, a Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take 
into consideration the geopolitical situation and dangers there.2 Iraq is a dangerous 
place because of violence from terrorists and insurgents. These entities continue to 
threaten the Iraqi Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, 
and those who cooperate with and assist the United States. Although the Iraqi 
Government is a U.S. ally, it does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil 
liberties in many instances. Applicant is aware of those dangers, having worked as a 
translator and knowing that terrorists portray translators as traitors. Second, Applicant 
had numerous connections to Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 2008, 
and has spent substantial periods in Iraq since then. Third, he maintains regular contact 
with family members in Iraq, in particular his mother, to whom he speaks frequently and 
sends financial assistance. She recently visited him in the city of his employment. She is 
aware that he assisted U.S. forces in Iraq in the past and is working as a translator 
again. A terrorist or insurgent could easily learn about his work and attempt to retaliate 
against his relatives or to coerce Applicant, through his relatives, to compromise 
classified information.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all pertinent facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the significant security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility must be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
