 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ADP Case No. 17-00586 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Patrick Cox, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 12, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 27, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 18, 2018. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open until February 1, 
2018, to permit Applicant to submit additional documents. He submitted AE E, which 
was admitted without objection.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript on January 26, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in 1998. He served in 
the military from 1999 to 2003 and received an honorable discharge. He attended 
college from 2003 to 2005, but did not earn a degree. He was married from 2007 to 
2015 and has two children from that marriage, ages 11 and 8 years old. They live with 
their mother. He pays approximately $300 a month in child support. He remarried in 
2015 and has a one-year-old child from this marriage and two stepchildren, ages eight 
and four years old. His wife does not work outside the home. He has worked for the 
same federal contractor since 2011.3  
 
 Applicant funded his college education using the GI Bill and student loans. He 
testified that he did not pay his student loans when they were due. He stated, “Student 
loans, in my opinion, were a bill that was always going to be there, so I never prioritized 
those.”4 He further stated, “Because I mean, they don’t, after a certain period of time, 
some loans will be written off, or you know, something like that.”5 He explained, “They’re 
never going to go away until I pay them, so I would have in my thinking then was I had 
my whole life to pay $13,000 worth of student loans.” He determined that it was not 
necessary to pay his student loans when required because they would not be 
discharged in bankruptcy and would not be removed from his credit report. He 
commented that his failure to pay his student loan made his life harder.6 
 
 Applicant testified he was not making much money when the student loans 
became due. In the past, he received notices from the creditor attempting to collect 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
3 Tr. 19-24. 
 
4 Tr. 24. 
 
5 Tr. 24. 
 
6 Tr. 25, 29. 
 
3 
payments. He responded a few times. He arranged payment plans, but defaulted on 
them. He estimated that over the years he made 10 payments totaling about $500. The 
original creditors filed claims against the Government as the guarantor on the defaulted 
student loans.7  
 
 Applicant disclosed his delinquent student loans on his November 2011 SF 85P 
application. During his December 2011 background interview, he told the investigator 
that he had only made a couple of payments on his student loans since 2005. He 
admitted he had not made any payments in the past two to three years. He was 
receiving letters once or twice a month regarding the loan’s delinquency. He told the 
investigator he was unable to make payments in the past, but he now was earning 
enough and anticipated making the payments in February or March 2012. He 
anticipated paying the loan in full in the next ten years.8 
 
 Applicant disclosed in his March 2015 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative 
Processing (e-QIP) that his wages were being garnished for past-due student loans. He 
indicated that he had another student loan that was past due, but his wages were not 
garnished for that loan. He stated that once the garnishment ended, he would arrange a 
payment schedule to pay the second student loan. He stated, “Student loan repayment 
has not been a priority thus far. It will be now that they are garnishing my wages at 15% 
per paycheck though.”9 He estimated his garnishment would end in January 2015.10  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in September 2015. He 
told the investigator that he had no intention of paying his student loans because he 
was living paycheck to paycheck and it was not a priority to pay it.11  
 
 In January 2017, Applicant wanted to purchase a house. Because his defaulted 
student loans and other negative information that were on his credit report, that would 
prohibit him from obtaining a mortgage, he contacted the student loan creditor (SOR ¶ 
1.a - $13,489), and other creditors. The student loans were then placed in a deferred 
status and an income-based payment plan was arranged. The payment plan requires 
him to make monthly payments of $155 beginning in March 2018.12 The debt is 
unresolved.  
  
                                                          
7 Tr. 26-29, 35, 39; GE 4. 
 
8 GE 5, 6.  
 
9 GE 1 at page 41. 
 
10 GE 1. Any derogatory information not alleged will not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but may 
be considered in the application of mitigating conditions, in making a credibility determination, and in a 
whole-person analysis.  
 
11 GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. 26-29, 40; AE A, D. 
 
4 
 Applicant testified that he could not afford to pay his bill to a communications 
provider, and it became delinquent (SOR ¶ 1.b - $1,397). The debt is reflected in his 
May 2015 and December 2016 credit reports.13 Applicant disclosed this debt in his 
March 2015 e-QIP and stated, “Payment plan will be setup beginning in January 
2015.”14 Applicant was interviewed in September 2015 by a government investigator. 
He indicated he had not set up a payment plan to resolve this debt because he was 
living paycheck to paycheck, and it was not a priority to pay it. He did not know when he 
would pay it.15 He testified he paid the debt in January or February 2017. He provided a 
document that shows the debt had been delinquent since May 2014. He paid it in May 
2017.16 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,171) was reported in Applicant’s December 
2011 and May 2015 credit bureau reports as a collection account delinquent since 
2010. He was confronted with the debt in his December 2011 background interview. He 
told the investigator the account might be with a cable company. He was unable to 
recall if he was delinquent on the account. He was again confronted with the debt during 
his September 2015 background interview. He told the investigator that he did not 
recognize the account. He admitted he owed the debt in his answer to the SOR. He 
testified that he paid the debt in January or February 2017. He did not provide 
documentary proof that it was paid. He provided a credit report that does not report the 
debt. A post-hearing email from Applicant stated that the debt was purchased by 
another creditor and its collection agency did not have a record of the debt. He stated, “I 
contacted the loan officer for my home and the [name] account was not part of the 
agreement to pay in order to secure the loan.”17 The debt is unresolved. 
 
 When asked why Applicant did not pay his debts, he said, “Just financial troubles 
at the time. My previous marriage, I was not the – I did not run the money. I didn’t see it. 
I didn’t – so things were happening I was unaware of.”18 He provided no further 
explanations. 
 
 Applicant estimated he has between $400 and $500 of expendable income after 
he pays his monthly bills. He purchased a house in May 2017. He purchased a used car 
in January 2017 ($12,000) and a motorcycle ($5,000) in June 2017. Applicant has no 
savings. He has not had financial counseling. He testified that he has a written budget.19  
 
                                                          
13 GE 3, 4.  
 
14 GE 1 at 43-44. 
 
15 Tr. 31-33; GE 2. 
 
16 Tr. 31; Answer to SOR. 
 
17 Tr. 30-33; GE 2, 3, 6, 7; AE E. 
 
18 Tr. 31. 
 
19 Tr. 36-39, 41. 
 
5 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts from 2010 and a delinquent student loan from 
about 2005 that he is unwilling or unable to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to 
support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 Applicant has been aware of his delinquent student loan for many years through 
notices from the creditor and being confronted by investigators in 2011 and 2015 
regarding its status. His wages were garnished for another delinquent student loan and 
he stated he would pay the remaining delinquent loan once the garnishment was 
completed in January 2015. He failed to take action on his student loan until he wanted 
to secure a home mortgage. He has an income-based payment plan, but has not yet 
made a payment. Applicant also failed to take timely action on the two other delinquent 
debts alleged. He eventually paid the three-year-old debt in SOR ¶ 1.b in May 2017, at 
the time he was attempting to secure a mortgage. The remaining debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
which dates back to 2010, presumably can no longer be found by the creditor. 
Applicant’s past inaction, disregard for his legal obligations, and his repeated failure to 
follow through on his promises are indications of his ongoing financial problems. I am 
unable to conclude future financial problem are unlikely to recur. His behavior casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant provided minimal information about why he failed to timely address his 
student loan debt or other debts. He indicated his divorce impacted him, but provided no 
details. He submitted some evidence that when the student loans became due, he did 
not have the money, but did not explain why when his income increased he did not take 
affirmative action to pay his debts. I have considered his divorce as a condition beyond 
his control. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) requires Applicant to have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant repeatedly ignored his obligation to 
repay his student loans. He indicated his intent to repay his student loan and delinquent 
debts, but has not followed through. It was not until he applied for a mortgage that he 
contact the delinquent creditors. Applicant did not act responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
minimal application.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling. Applicant 
has defaulted on past payment plans and testified that the reason he contacted the 
student loan creditor was because he wanted to secure a mortgage, which he has 
accomplished. Applicant’s unreliable past conduct leads me to conclude that there are 
not clear indications that his problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was confronted in the past by government investigators about his 
student loan debt. He repeatedly was notified by the creditor. He indicated because 
student loans would never drop off his credit report or be discharged he was not 
motivated to pay them. It was only when he wanted to secure a home mortgage that he 
made a payment arrangement with the student loan creditor. He has not yet made any 
payments. Applicant failed to address the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c that was reported in 
collection from 2010 and brought to his attention during his investigative interview. 
According to Applicant, the creditor no longer has the debt on its books. This is likely 
due to the age of the debt. He stated he paid the debt, but did not provide proof of the 
payment. Finally, he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b in May 2017, after it was delinquent for 
more than three years. None of these actions constitute a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or resolve the debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He has been steadily employed since at least 2011. 
Despite being aware of his defaulted student loans and other debts, he failed to 
responsibly address them until he wanted to secure a home mortgage. Applicant has 
ignored his student loan debt and failed to follow through on payment plans in the past. 
A fundamental aspect of working in a position of trust is that one is required to do the 
right thing, even if it is not in one’s personal best interest. Applicant’s past conduct 
raises concerns in this regard, in addition to his unreliable financial track record. 
Concerns remain about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant 
failed to mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
