 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-01652 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to his connections 
to Somalia because his connections to the United States are much greater than his 
connections to Somalia. Applicant provided false information to the U.S. Citizenship and 
Immigration Services (USCIS) to obtain residence in the United States. He is worried 
about losing his U.S. citizenship. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1. On July 11, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs), Appendix A to Security Executive Agent Directive 4, effective on June 
8, 2017.   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence and 
personal conduct guidelines. 
 
On August 22, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
HE 3. On October 26, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On October 
30, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On November 7, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
November 28, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 3 exhibits; Applicant offered 19 
exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Tr. 13-16; GE 1-3; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-R. On December 5, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant offered summaries for administrative notice 
discussing foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to 
Somalia, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan. Tr. 14; HE 4; AE P; AE Q; AE R. Administrative or 
official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 
4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well 
known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). There were 
no objections to me taking administrative notice of the proffered documents. Tr. 14. The 
requests for administrative notice are granted. The “Somalia” section is derived from 
Department Counsel and Applicant’s administrative notice requests. HE 4; AE P. The 
“Saudi Arabia,” and “Sudan” administrative notice requests were carefully considered; 
however, Applicant’s connections to those two counties are so attenuated that 
discussions of those two countries in this decision are not warranted. His half-brother 
who had been living in Saudi Arabia moved back to Somalia, and he had no other 
connections to Saudi Arabia. See SOR ¶ 2.e. His cousin living in Sudan may no longer 
live there, and he may not currently occupy a Somali Government position. See SOR ¶ 
2.f. He had no other connections to Sudan. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his application for political asylum in the 
United States in about November 1999 when he falsely claimed he was a citizen and 
                                            
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
resident of Somalia and feared for his life (¶ 1.a). The SOR also alleges: Applicant’s 
father (¶ 2.a), two half-brothers (¶ 2.c), and one half-sister (¶ 2.c) are citizens and 
residents of Somalia; He provided financial support to his father (¶ 2.b) and his half-
brother (¶ 2.d) who are citizens and residents of Somalia; One of Applicant’s half-
brothers is a citizen of Somalia and a resident of Saudi Arabia (¶ 2.e); and his cousin is 
a citizen of Canada, resides in Sudan, and has connections to the Somali Government 
(¶ 2.f). Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, and 2.f. He partially 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.d, and 2.e. He also provided some mitigating 
information. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal government agency, and a 
security clearance is not required for his current employment. Tr. 19; GE 1. He has 
never held a security clearance. Tr. 19. His resume provides details of his employment 
history. AE C. See also GE 1; GE 2; GE 3. He has received training and certifications 
establishing his ability to perform interpreter duties. AE I. He seeks employment from a 
defense contractor as a linguist. Tr. 19.  
 
Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics and biology from a 
university in Somalia. Tr. 17. He received excellent grades from the university. AE E. He 
was married from 1989 to 2003, and from 2007 to 2015. Tr. 17-18. His seven children 
are ages 9 to 27. Tr. 18. One of his children was born in Somalia; five of his children 
were born in Canada; and one child was born in the United States. Tr. 18, 50; GE 1; GE 
2; AE B.    
 
In 1990, Applicant moved from Somalia to Canada, and in 1994, he became a 
Canadian citizen. Tr. 49-50. He lived in Canada from 1990 to 1999, when he moved to 
the United States. Tr. 49. He did not seek political asylum in Canada. Tr. 50. After 
applying for residence in the United States in 1999, he returned to Canada until 2003 
because he wanted to be with his family. He has lived in the United States since 2003. 
Tr. 20. Applicant emigrated from Canada to the United States to obtain employment. Tr. 
20. 
 
In 2009, Applicant became a permanent U.S. resident, and in 2014, Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen. Tr. 20, 53; AE H. Applicant has not served in the military of any 
country. Tr. 21. Applicant has not traveled to any country in Africa or the Middle East in 
the last seven years. GE 1. Applicant promised to limit his future contacts with foreign 
citizens. AE D. 
 
In 1988, Applicant’s mother passed away. Tr. 38. Applicant’s father is a citizen 
and resident of Somalia. Tr. 27. His father is in his 80s and receives financial support 
from his children who live in Europe and the United States. Tr. 28. Since 2003, 
Applicant has provided about $2,500 to his father, mostly in payments from about $40 to 
$200 once or twice a year. Tr. 29-30, 45. In 2017, he sent his father $750. Tr. 45. He 
communicates with his father every year or two, and he cannot remember the last time 
he communicated with his father. Tr. 30. 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has two half-brothers and two half-sisters, and they are citizens and 
residents of Somalia. Tr. 31, 48. He does not have any siblings living in Somalia. He 
rarely communicates with his half-siblings in Somalia. Tr. 32. He has not talked to his 
half-brothers for three or four years, and he most recently communicated with his half-
sister in 2015. Tr. 34-35. Around 2014, Applicant gave $700 to one of his half-brothers 
living in Somalia to provide to his father. Tr. 36. He does not have any half-brothers in 
Saudi Arabia because the one who lived in Saudi Arabia moved back to Somalia. Tr. 
33. From 2003 to 2016, Applicant sent $16,300 to family living in Somalia and Canada. 
Tr. 46-47; GE 3. 
 
Applicant’s cousin is or was an official in the Somali Government. Tr. 38. 
Applicant was unsure whether his cousin was still an official in the Somali Government. 
Tr. 38. He most recently communicated with his cousin in December 2016 when his 
cousin came to the United States. Tr. 38-39, 61. His cousin sponsored Applicant’s 
immigration to and residency in Canada in the 1990s. Tr. 39-40, 60. His cousin has 
spent many years in the United States. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In 1999, Applicant entered the United States from Canada. Tr. 51. After he was 
in the United States for about a month, he filed a form with the USCIS falsely stating he 
was not a citizen and resident of Canada. Tr. 21, 52. He claimed he was a citizen and 
resident of Somalia, and he was in danger if he remained in Somalia. Tr. 21, 52; SOR ¶ 
1.a; GE 2; GE 3; SOR response. He filed for residency in the United States based on 
political asylum. Tr. 22. He claimed he did it on a whim, and he did not carefully 
consider what he was doing. Tr. 22. In 2000, he received political asylum. Tr. 23, 53.  
 
Applicant returned to Canada after 2000 to be with his children. Tr. 23. In 2003, 
he returned to the United States, and he resumed his U.S. residency. Tr. 24. He 
acknowledged that he falsified the USCIS documentation to obtain permanent residency 
in the United States. Tr. 24. He denied that he had ever falsified any other government 
documents. Tr. 25. On May 28, 2015, he disclosed the falsification of his request for 
asylum to the FBI. Tr. 26, 58-59. He did not receive the employment he sought in 2015, 
because of the immigration falsification. Tr. 59. He disclosed his false application for 
U.S. residence on his January 8, 2016 SCA. He said he regretted submitting the false 
documentation to the USCIS, and he said that he is very sorry. Tr. 24, 44.   
 
The current version of USCIS Form N-400, Application for Naturalization, asks at 
least four questions about past conduct: Part 12, section 22 asks, “Have you EVER 
committed, assisted in committing, or attempted to commit, a crime or offense for which 
you were NOT arrested?”; Part 12, section 30I asks, “Have you EVER made any 
misrepresentation to obtain any public benefit in the United States?”; Part 12, section 31 
asks, “Have you EVER given any U.S. Government officials any information or 
documentation that was false, fraudulent, or misleading?”; and Part 12, section 32, 
“Have you EVER lied to any U.S. Government officials to gain entry or admission into 
the United States or to gain immigration benefits while in the United States?” HE 5 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(emphasis in original).2 The signature on USCIS Form N-400 is made under oath or 
affirmation. 
 
In 2009, Applicant completed documentation for the USCIS for permanent 
residency, and around 2014, he completed additional documentation for the USCIS 
when he applied for naturalization. Tr. 54. He did not provide any of the immigration 
documentation that he submitted to the USCIS. He did not disclose to the USCIS that 
his asylum request in 1999 was false. Tr. 54. Applicant is worried that the USCIS will 
conclude that he fraudulently obtained his U.S. citizenship and will revoke his U.S. 
citizenship. Tr. 63. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Nine character letters laud Applicant’s loyalty, diligence, dedication, and 
professionalism. AE A; AE J. None of his character letters mention an awareness that 
he fraudulently obtained permanent residence in the United States or U.S. citizenship. 
His performance evaluations show satisfactory to excellent work and contributions to his 
employer. AE K; AE L. 
 
Somalia 
 
Somalia was established as a federal parliamentary republic in 2012. Somalia 
has made strides towards democracy and compliance with the rule of law since 2012. 
Somalia has several important human rights enshrined in the law. The U.S. State 
Department has warned U.S. citizens to avoid travel to Somalia because of widespread 
terrorist and criminal activity. Al-Shabaab is associated with al Qaida and has engaged 
in numerous bombings and murders targeting the Somali Government, civilians, and 
foreigners. Hundreds of al-Shabaab fighters have attacked military bases. Somali towns 
have been occupied by al-Shabaab. Somali Government security forces have countered 
in some instances with torture, murder, and other illegal actions. Human rights violations 
have occurred. There is no evidence that Somali terrorists use coercion to obtain U.S. 
classified information from U.S citizens or residents. The Somali Government has 
implemented changes to reduce and curtail terrorism. The United States and the Somali 
Government are allies in the war against terrorism, and the United States has employed 
drone strikes in Somalia to counter terrorists.3  
 
                                            
2 I take administrative notice of the content of the current U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS) Form N-400. HE 5. The current USCIS Form N-400 went into effect on December 23, 
2016, after Applicant filed for citizenship. Completion of a USCIS Form I-485 is necessary to apply for 
permanent residency.    
 
3 The magnitude of violence in Somalia may be escalating. See Jason Burke, Africa 
correspondent for The Guardian, “Mogadishu truck bomb: 500 casualties in Somalia’s worst terrorist 
attack,” (Oct. 16, 2017), https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/oct/15/truck-bomb-mogadishu-kills-
people-somalia (stating more than 300 deaths resulted from a single truck bomb). 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant does not frequently communicate4 with any citizens or residents of 
Somalia, Saudi Arabia, or the Sudan. Applicant left Somalia 27 years ago, and he has 
elected not to communicate with his relatives in Somalia for the previous two years and 
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in the future. Concerns alleged in the SOR pertaining to Saudi Arabia and the Sudan 
are not established because Applicant’s half-brother who had been residing in Saudi 
Arabia moved back to Somalia, and there is insufficient evidence to establish his cousin 
continues to reside in or have contacts with Sudan.  
 
There are widely-documented safety issues for residents of Somalia because of 
terrorists and insurgents. The mere possession of close family ties with one or more 
family members living in Somalia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B; however, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
  
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Somalia with the United 
States, and the situation in Somalia places a significant, but not insurmountable burden 
of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with his father living in 
Somalia does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist a relative living in Somalia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Somalia 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Somalia has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with father who is living in Somalia creates a potential 
conflict of interest because terrorists could place pressure on his family living in Somalia 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified information. This relationship 
creates “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” 
under AG ¶ 7. Applicant provides funds to his father and those funds are crucial to his 
father’s well being. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s 
contacts with his father in Somalia and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established with respect to his father; 
however, they are not established with respect to his other relatives living in Somalia. 
Further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply. Applicant does not have frequent 
communications with his father. His financial support for his father shows the requisite 
connection to establish a security concern. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 2003, 
Applicant returned to reside in the United States, and in 2014, he became a U.S. citizen. 
One of his children was born in the United States and resides in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his father, who is a citizen 
and resident of Somalia. Applicant’s father is vulnerable to terrorists in Somalia; 
however, it is important to be mindful of the United States’ investment in 
counterterrorism efforts in Somalia and Somalia’s increasing efforts in democracy and 
compliance with the rule of law.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his father living in Somalia are less significant 
than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the U.S. 
Government, family living in the United States, and U.S. citizenship are important 
factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His connections to the United 
States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome and mitigate the foreign influence 
security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (3) a pattern of . . . rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual 
or group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
could affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
In 1999, Applicant made a false statement to USCIS when he did not disclose 
that he was a citizen and resident of Canada. He falsely claimed he was a resident of 
Somalia, and he needed to emigrate from Somalia because of the dangers in Somalia. 
In 2000, the USCIS relied on his representations and granted him asylum in the United 
States. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) are established. 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists four conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are fully established. In 1999, Applicant made a 
false statement to the USCIS to obtain residence in the United States. In 2000, the U.S. 
Government approved his request, and he received the benefit of U.S. residency, as a 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
result of his false statement. When he applied for permanent residency in 1999, and 
when he applied for citizenship around 2014, he had an opportunity to disclose  
accurate information about his residence and citizenship in Canada and to disavow his 
previous false statement about Somalia. He decided not to disclose that the statements 
supporting asylum were false.5 He receives some credit under AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) 
for disclosing his history of lying on May 28, 2015, to the FBI and on his January 8, 
2016 SCA.   
 
Applicant is concerned that he is vulnerable to loss of his U.S. citizenship. 
Congress created two alternative approaches to denaturalization relating to making 
false statements during the naturalization process, one civil and one criminal. The 
denaturalization procedure established under 8 U.S.C. § 1451(a) is civil and equitable in 
nature, initiated by filing a petition in the district court where the citizen resides. Title 8 
U.S.C. § 1451(e) is criminal in nature and makes denaturalization mandatory where the 
citizen is found guilty of violating 8 U.S.C. § 1425. See United States v. Maslenjak, 821 
F.3d 675 (6th Cir. 2016) (discussing denaturalization), rev’d on other grounds, Maslenjak 
v. United States, 137 S. Ct. 1918, 2017 U.S. LEXIS 4042 (U.S., June 22, 2017) 
(criminal conviction under 8 U.S.C. § 1451(e) requires proof of causal connection 
between false statement and decision to grant naturalization). Title 18 U.S.C. § 1425(a), 
makes it a crime to knowingly procure, contrary to law, the naturalization of any person.6 
A false statement to the USCIS to obtain permanent residency or citizenship may also 
violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Title 18 U.S.C. § 1015(a) makes it a crime to make any false 
statement under oath, in any case, proceeding, or matter relating to, or under, or by 
virtue of any law of the United States relating to naturalization, citizenship, or 
registration of aliens. I specifically do not conclude that Applicant committed any 
criminal conduct, and I have not assessed his case under Guideline J. See note 5, 
supra. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
                                            
5 Applicant’s SOR does not allege: (1) any false statements after 1999; (2) his false statements 
may constitute criminal conduct under 18 U.S.C. §§ 1001 and 1015(a) as well as under 8 U.S.C. § 1425; 
and (3) his false statements could result in denaturalization as well as confinement and fines. In ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 
14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
These three non-SOR allegations will not be considered criminal conduct under Guideline J, and 
consideration will be limited to the five purposes listed above. 
 
6 Because a certificate of citizenship illegally obtained is void ab initio there is no statute of 
limitations applicable to denaturalization proceedings (8 U.S.C. § 1451). United States v. Walus, 453 F. 
Supp 699 (N.D. Ill. 1978), rev’d on other grounds, 616 F.2d 283 (7th Cir. 1980).   
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines B and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal government agency. He has 
received training and certifications establishing his ability to perform interpreter duties. 
He seeks employment for a defense contractor as a linguist. Applicant received a 
bachelor’s degree in mathematics and biology from a university in Somalia. One of his 
children was born in Somalia; five of his children were born in Canada; and one child 
was born in the United States.     
 
Applicant provides financial support to his father, who is a citizen and resident of 
Somalia. In 1990, Applicant moved from Somalia to Canada, and in 1994, he became a 
Canadian citizen. He lived in Canada from 1990 to 1999, when he applied for residency 
in the United States. He did not seek political asylum in Canada. In 2009, Applicant 
became a permanent U.S. resident, and in 2014, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. 
Applicant emigrated from Canada to the United States to obtain employment. He has 
lived in the United States since 2003. Applicant has not traveled to any country in Africa 
or the Middle East in the last seven years. GE 1. Applicant’s connections to the United 
States are much greater than his connections to Somalia. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Somalia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.7 Somalia is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and insurgents. These entities continue to threaten the Somalia 
Government, the interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the 
United States. The Somalia Government does not fully comply with the rule of law or 
                                            
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Somalia Governments 
are allies in the war on terrorism.       
 
Applicant made a false statement to obtain residency in the United States in 
1999. Around 2009, he applied for permanent residency and around 2014, he applied 
for naturalization. He had opportunities in 2009 and 2014 to disclose his false statement 
in 1999, and he did not do so. This case turns on his original false statement in 1999, 
and his failure to affirmatively disclose to USCIS that he was dishonest about seeking 
asylum in 1999 thereafter. Consideration of the non-SOR allegations is limited. See 
note 5, supra. As AG ¶ 15 explains, “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.” Applicant is concerned about the loss of his U.S. citizenship 
because of his false statement to the USCIS. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated; however, personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
