 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01946 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
02/05/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record (Answer). 
 
 On August 24, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant eight exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant 
submitted a response to the FORM (Response). The exhibits accompanying the FORM 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
and the documents Applicant submitted with his Answer are admitted into the record.  
On January 17, 2018, I was assigned the case for decision.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 78, is employed as an engineer for a defense contractor. He obtained 
his undergraduate degree in 1960. He has never married. He completed his security 
clearance application in 2016. (Item 5) He has been with his current employer since 
1967. He has held a security clearance for 55 years. (Item 4) 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts that total almost $138,000. He admits eight 
delinquent debts totaling approximately $119,000. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant’s reason for the delinquent debts on the SOR stem from the fact that 
he allowed his nephew and his wife (niece) to use his credit cards. His niece by 
marriage had a heart condition and came to live with Applicant. She and Applicant’s 
nephew lived with him from 1997 to 2012. They had two children. At one point, 
Applicant’s niece stated that the older children could help with the rent. However, that 
never happened. The niece used Applicant’s credit cards to buy food. Applicant was 
aware of the use. He started to see high balances and confronted her, but he did not 
take away the credit cards. His nephew would tell Applicant that his wife’s condition 
would worsen because she would get too stressed without the ability to have the means 
to pay for food and other items. Applicant’s nephew had a low-paying job and did not 
pay his wife’s bills.  (Item 4) 
 
Applicant stopped confronting his niece because of her heart condition. He 
threatened to take away the credit cards, but he continued to allow her to use them.  
Applicant took out a second mortgage on his home so that he could continue to pay the 
bills.  In 2006, he took out a $100,000 home equity line of credit.  By 2011, Applicant 
could no longer stay current with all the bills and he incurred delinquent debts. His 
nephew’s wife died of a massive heart attack in 2012. Since her death he has prioritized 
his bills. He paid off a mortgage that is not alleged in the SOR, and presented a 
certificate of release. (Response to FORM, attachment)  He made extra payments on 
the second mortgage, and the balance has dropped from $100,000 to $82,000. 
(Response to FORM, attachment). 
 
Applicant’s priorities include paying his federal and state taxes, property taxes, 
primary mortgage, utility bills, car insurance, cable account, living expenses, medical 
expenses, and house and car maintenance. His credit reports confirm that he has no 
such debts. He had no financial difficulties until his niece and nephew moved in with 
him. (Item 8) Since her death, he has paid off his first mortgage, for which he submitted 
                                                          
2 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD-4), revising the Adjudicative Guidelines. The revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all 
security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (hereinafter “AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
evidence. He also paid two credit cards and enclosed documentation. (Response to 
FORM) He presented documentation that a $13,156.00 account to CITI is paid in full. 
He started payments on that account in 2010. He has a track record of making 
payments on his accounts. He no longer uses credit cards. He stated that he accepts 
responsibility for these debts incurred by his late niece, but his plan is a reasonable one 
under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant’s eight debts that he acknowledges on the SOR amount to 
approximately $119,000. His latest credit report from 2017 confirms the mortgage paid 
and other paid accounts. The other accounts alleged in the SOR are collection accounts 
with no account numbers. They do appear on the 2017 and 2016 credit reports. (Item 6 
and7) 
 
The delinquent debts alleged in SOR 1.a through 1.l are not to be minimized. 
They are not paid. However, in light of the financial track record that Applicant has that 
spans a 40-year period or more, it is reasonable to conclude that he is going to pay 
them after he completes his second mortgage. The circumstances were rather unique 
and not due to any gambling or excessive living outside his means. 
 
Applicant has worked for his employer since 1967, and has held a security 
clearance for about 55 years. There are no recorded incidents, and no summary 
interview in the file to gain more insight. 
 
    As of the submission of the case for decision, the delinquent debts in the SOR 
allegations are not resolved. Applicant’s credit reports do not reflect any other 
delinquent accounts that are not resolved. (Item 4) 
 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
4 
 
 
Administrative judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he allowed his nephew and niece who 
were living with him to use his credit cards. The accounts became delinquent. The 
presence of delinquent debt can raise the Guideline F security concern, which is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following pertinent ones: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn. . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems were attributable to his compassion for his 
niece who had severe health issues. She died of a massive heart attack in 2012. 
Applicant allowed his niece and nephew to live with him. His nephew did not have 
money to pay bills. Applicant confronted his niece several times, but was afraid of 
upsetting her and contributing to more heart issues.   
 
Applicant has shown that he has diligently worked all his life and paid his bills. He 
has paid his primary mortgage and is now paying the second mortgage that he obtained 
in 2006 to help pay the niece’s bills. He prioritized the bills and his credit reports over 
the years show that he always paid as agreed. He did not simply walk away from his 
debts. Instead, he responsibly addressed each of his debts. He chose not to file for 
bankruptcy. His plan is to finish paying the second mortgage and begin to pay the 
alleged accounts in the SOR. His past financial problems are not attributable to not 
living within his means. He incurred debt trying to help his niece, her children and his 
nephew. He made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. He presented documentation 
showing that he is current on all his expenses. He has a viable plan to pay his debts. 
 
The unique circumstances giving rise to Applicant’s past financial problems do 
not cast doubt on his current ability and willingness to continue to properly handle and 
safeguard classified information. Additionally, the manner in which he addressed the 
debts that he incurred following his niece’s death raise favorable inferences regarding 
his continued suitability. Applicant’s present financial situation does not raise a security 
concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, including 
considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2, I find that Applicant met his 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns at issue. 
Furthermore, he established his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
