 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01530 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Patrick Cox, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
He refuted the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns raised. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 20, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 18, 2018. The 
 
2 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on January 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.m, 
and 2.a. He denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.f, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l and 1.n. His admissions 
are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He graduated from high school in 1994. He married in 
2004 and has children ages 16, 15 and 10 years old. He has worked for his present 
employer, a federal contractor, continuously since 2008 and has no periods of 
unemployment. Before then he worked from 2003 to 2008 for another contractor with no 
periods of unemployment. Applicant’s wife began working the summer of 2017. She 
was unemployed for two years before starting her most recent job. Before then she 
worked as a day-care provider for about three years. Applicant estimated he earns 
about $60,000 and his wife earns about $20,000.1  
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to a period in approximately January 
2014 when he was unable to work due to knee surgery. The debts are supported by his 
admissions and credit reports from June 2015 and April 2017. He disclosed on his April 
2015 security clearance application (SCA) that he had delinquent debts and he was 
“making arrangements with all creditors to make payments.”2 He further stated in his 
SCA the following:  
 
Have not taken any action due to my spouse only working part time at this 
time. Unable to make payments at this time until she is employed full time. 
We are currently readjusting our finances, expenses in order to [fullfil] 
financial obligation to our creditors and the debt we owe. We will [pay off] 
the debt when we receive our tax refund in Jan 2015.3  
 
 Applicant testified he was on disability in 2014 and was only earning 70% of his 
salary. He went back to work full time in November 2014, earning his full pay. In 
September 2015, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. All of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR except ¶ 1.j ($138) were addressed during the 
interview. Applicant told the investigator that he was aware that he had several bad 
debts and unpaid collection accounts, but he was unaware of the extent or was 
unaware of the exact creditors or amounts owed. He indicated his wife handles the 
majority of the bills. He acknowledged the debts that he was confronted with by the 
investigator that are alleged in the SOR (except SOR ¶ 1.j). He told the investigator he 
                                                          
1 Tr. 22-27; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 28-29; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
3 
intended to obtain a credit report and contact creditors to make payment 
arrangements.4 
 
 Applicant told the government investigator that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($21,053) 
was for a voluntarily-repossessed vehicle. He was unable to make the payments. He 
testified he purchased the vehicle new in 2013 and, due to his knee surgery and 
reduced pay, he could not afford it. He attempted to negotiate a repayment plan, but the 
creditor wanted a lump sum and would not accept a monthly plan. He provided a 
document from the creditor that indicated it would accept a reduced amount of $5,265. 
Applicant is unable to pay this amount.5 The debt is unresolved.  
 
 Applicant provided documents to show he paid the delinquent medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k ($130) and the debt in ¶ 1.f ($288) in June 2017.6 These debts are 
resolved.  
 
 The remaining debts in the SOR are unresolved. Applicant testified he is working 
on resolving them and is trying to come up with the money to pay them. He has not 
contacted the creditors. He stated he was going to pay the debts with overtime pay and 
by reducing expenses. He admitted he has been working overtime since June 2017, but 
did not use the money to pay the delinquent debts. Applicant stated he is current on his 
monthly expenses, including his mortgage. He does not want to go further in debt by 
missing payments on his current expenses. He does not have extra income to pay his 
delinquent debts. He owns two cars, each purchased new in 2016 and 2017. His car 
payments are $594 and $878 respectively. He has not participated in financial 
counseling.7  
 
 Applicant’s April 2015 SCA required he disclose whether he had ever been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. He responded “no.” In his answer to 
the SOR, he admitted ¶ 2.a, which alleged he falsified material facts and deliberately 
failed to disclose he was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol in 1998 and 
again in 2007. At his hearing, Applicant testified during direct examination that he failed 
to disclose his arrests because he thought he only had to if it was a felony, and he 
misunderstood the question.8  
 
 During Applicant’s September 2015 interview with a government investigator, he 
did not disclose he had any alcohol-related arrests during the normal line of questioning. 
He did not provide information about his arrests until he was confronted with the 
information about his May 2007 DUI arrest when he replied “oh that’s right.” He 
indicated he had forgotten about the arrest and contended it was more than seven 
                                                          
4 Tr. 30, 36-37; GE 2.  
 
5 Tr. 28-33; GE 1; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 33-36; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 37-45, 49-50, 54. 
 
8 GE 1. 
 
4 
years old so he did not think he had to disclose it. At his hearing, he explained he 
remembered the investigator asked him about his 2007 arrest and he thought the 
charge had been dropped. He then disputed the accuracy of the summary of interview 
contained in GE 2. Therefore, under the circumstances, I will not consider this exhibit. 
Applicant testified that that he did not disclose it because he thought he only had to go 
back seven years. This was the reason he also did not disclose the 1998 DUI arrest. He 
admitted he was tired when he was interviewed, after having worked the graveyard 
shift. He stated he was confused, but did not have anything to hide.9   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
9 Tr. 46-49, 56-61; GE 2, 5. 
 
5 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts beginning in about 2014 that he is 
unwilling or unable to resolve. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that he has been aware are a 
trustworthiness concern since he completed his SCA in April 2015. He indicated in his 
SCA that he would pay the delinquent debts with his income-tax refund. During his 
September 2015 background interview, he also indicated he would address the debts 
by obtaining a credit report and making payment arrangements. He paid two small 
debts after receiving the SOR (¶¶ 1.f and 1.k) in June 2017. He testified that he 
intended to use his overtime pay to address the debts, but admitted he has been 
working overtime since June 2017 and had not used the extra income to pay his debts. 
All but two of the debts alleged remain delinquent. His financial problems are ongoing 
and there is insufficient evidence to conclude future financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period when he was only receiving 
70% disability pay for a four-month period in 2014, and his wife was working part time. 
These were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s disability 
occurred in 2014. His wife is now working full time. He has been aware for more than 
two years that his delinquent debts are a trustworthiness concern. Despite providing 
assurances in his SCA and during his background interview that he was addressing the 
delinquent debts, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to show he has followed 
through on his promises. Although he testified he would use his overtime to pay his 
debts, he admitted he had not done so. Applicant has not acted responsibly in resolving 
his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
Applicant paid two debts after he received the SOR, and they are resolved. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f 
and 1.k). AG ¶ 20(d) applies only to these debts.  
 
7 
 Applicant denied certain debts in the SOR, but did not provide evidence of his 
reason for denial or disputing the debts. He did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate a dispute or evidence that he is resolving the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant testimony provided differing explanations for his failure to disclose his 
prior alcohol arrests. Although somewhat troubling, there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude he deliberately failed to disclose the required information. Applicant has 
refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He accumulated delinquent debts when his income 
was reduced for three to four months while on disability pay due to knee surgery. 
Despite being aware of the trustworthiness concerns regarding the debts and his 
repeated promises to address them, he has only paid two small debts. He has been 
earning his full pay since November 2014 and his wife is now working full time. He has 
been working overtime since June 2017, but has not addressed his remaining 
delinquent debts. Applicant failed to establish a reliable financial track record. He 
successfully refuted the personal conduct security concerns. Applicant failed to mitigate 
the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.f:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.k:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.l-1.n:   Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
