 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------ )  ADP Case No. 17-00862 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
public trust position. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from his history of drug involvement and 
substance misuse. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on April 20, 2016.1 Thereafter, on May 16, 2017, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), which is similar to a 
complaint, detailing a trustworthiness concern under Guideline H for drug involvement.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2017, and he requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. His answer consisted of handwritten 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
2 
 
responses on a copy of the SOR in which he admitted the factual allegations with some 
brief explanations. He did not submit any supporting documentation with his answer.  
  
On October 31, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on November 13, 2017. He did not reply 
to the FORM within the 30-day period provided for under the Directive. The case was 
assigned to me February 14, 2018.     
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is, in part, a report of 
investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interviews that took place during his 
background investigation in October 2016 and January 2017. The ROI is properly 
authenticated by a witness, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive, because 
Applicant authenticated the ROI in response to interrogatories issued to him. He pointed 
out two corrections to the factual information in the ROI, and he otherwise agreed with 
and adopted the summary as an accurate reflection of his interviews. Accordingly, the 
ROI is admissible and I will consider it in reaching my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 22-year-old customer service representative for a health-care 
contractor to the Defense Department. He has been so employed since about April 
2016. He is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for his job 
responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because his job involves access to sensitive but 
unclassified information, such as personally identifiable information (PII) or protected 
health information (PHI).  
 
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits a history of drug involvement during 
2012-2017. He used marijuana with varying frequency from September 2012 to at least 
March 2017. He purchased marijuana during 2015-2017. He purchased and used the 
prescription drug Adderall, which was not prescribed to him, during a three-month 
period in 2013. And he pleaded guilty to one count of possession of a controlled 
substance, which resulted in a sentence to (via a first-offender program) a fine, 
community service, and a drug and alcohol assessment. In addition to his admissions in 
his answer, the SOR allegations are established by the information in Applicant’s SF 86 
as well as information he provided during the processing of his case.2 
 
 In his April 2016 SF 86,3 Applicant disclosed his involvement with Adderall 
(explaining he used it to help him focus in school), and a conviction for possession of a 
controlled substance (Adderall). He did not disclose his involvement with marijuana in 
                                                          
2 Exhibits 3 and 4.  
 
3 Exhibit 3.  
 
 
3 
 
his April 2016 SF 86.4 Nor did he disclose his involvement with marijuana in an 
interview during the October 2016 background investigation. He eventually disclosed his 
marijuana involvement in an interview in January 2017.  
 
In his April 2017 response to interrogatories,5 Applicant stated that he first used 
marijuana in September 2012 and his last use occurred in March 2017 (although his 
use was not continuous during that time), and that he used marijuana about once a 
week. He admitted purchasing marijuana about once a month. He stated that he 
decided to stop using marijuana as of March 15, 2017, which was not a difficult decision 
for him, because marijuana is no longer acceptable in his life and his job. Although he 
continues to associate with people who use marijuana, he pledged not to use illegal 
drugs in the future as his job and well-being are more important.  
 
Law and Policy 
 
This case is adjudicated under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 
2017. 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement and substance misuse, the concern is 
that: 
 
[t]he illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescriptions and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are use in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose, can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. . .6 
 
 In addition to the above matters, I note that the Director of National 
Intelligence (DNI) issued an October 25, 2014 memorandum concerning 
adherence to federal laws prohibiting marijuana use. In doing so, the DNI 
emphasized three things. First, no state can authorize violations of federal law, 
                                                          
4 Applicant’s nondisclosure of his marijuana involvement in his SF 86 and during the October 2016 
interview were not alleged as a falsification or as another matter in the SOR. Because it is uncharged 
misconduct, I have considered it for the limited purpose of assessing Applicant’s credibility as well as 
assessing his evidence in mitigation.  
 
5 Exhibit 4.  
 
6 AG ¶ 24.  
 
 
4 
 
including violations of the Controlled Substances Act, which identifies marijuana 
as a Schedule I controlled drug. Second, changes to state laws (and the laws of 
the District of Columbia) concerning marijuana use do not alter the national 
security adjudicative guidelines. And third, a person’s disregard of federal law 
concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains relevant when 
making eligibility decisions for sensitive national security positions.  
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance abuse; 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds of revocation of national security eligibility. 
  
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s drug involvement and substance 
misuse during 2012-2017. Overall, his behavior is relatively recent with the latest use of 
marijuana occurring in March 2017, less than one year ago. The March 2017 date is 
significant, because it means he used marijuana after submitting his April 2016 SF 86 
and after interviews during the 2016-2017 background investigation.7 His drug 
involvement was not infrequent. It happened multiple times over a period of years. And 
his illegal use of marijuana did not occur under circumstances that are unlikely to recur.  
 
 Although Applicant stated that he terminated his marijuana involvement in March 
2017, I’m not persuaded that his behavior is safely in the past and will not recur. The 
best evidence on this point is threefold: (1) his nondisclosure of marijuana involvement 
in his SF 86; (2) his March 2017 use of marijuana, which was several months after 
                                                          
7 It’s probable that Applicant’s marijuana use during this time violated his employer’s drug-free workplace 
policy. I note that the Drug-Free Workplace Act, 41 U.S. Code § 8101-8106, requires federal contractors 
with a contract over $100,000 to establish certain drug-free workplace policies. See ISCR Case No. 16-
00578 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2017).  
 
 
5 
 
submitting his April 2016 SF 86; and (3) his continued association with people who use 
marijuana. Taken together, the circumstances tend to undermine the credibility of his 
stated intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance misuse.  
 
 Following the clearly-consistent standard, I have doubts and concerns about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice 
versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did 
not meet ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
