KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: It is proper for a Judge to consider previously mitigated conduct in light of more recent
security concerns.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-07094.a1
DATE: 09/05/2014
DATE: September 5, 2014
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-07094
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 20, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E
2
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 10, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was originally granted a clearance in 2001.  During a 2011 reinvestigation, he
revealed illegal drug use, including one instance in 2010 while he held a clearance.  He first used
marijuana in high school.  In 2000, he attended college on a basketball scholarship.  He was
dismissed from the team and stripped of his scholarship following a positive urinalysis for
marijuana.  Because of this, his parents kicked him out of the house.  Applicant joined the Air Force,
serving for eight years.  After his discharge, he worked for a retail chain.  In 2009, he used marijuana
twice.  Later that year, he embarked upon his current employment.  In 2010, while holding a
clearance, Applicant used marijuana at a party thrown by his sister-in-law in celebration of his
marriage.  
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant sought advice from his
supervisor.  He heeded his supervisor’s advice to admit the misconduct. Applicant received an
evaluation from a certified drug counselor, who opined that he was at low risk of substance abuse.
Applicant states that, on each occasion in which he used marijuana, his judgment was impaired by
alcohol.  He promises to refrain from drug use in the future.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s drug use was cross-alleged under Guidelines H and E.  In concluding that
Applicant had not mitigated the security concerns under either Guideline, the Judge cited to his six
uses between 1998 and 2010, which she stated could not be characterized as isolated.  She stated that
there was no evidence to show that Applicant had been under duress and that he provided no
evidence that would lend credence to his promise of future abstention.  The Judge described
Applicant’s testimony as inconsistent, offering a “whitewashed” version of events that was not
corrected until cross-examination.  Decision at 5  She noted evidence that Applicant had used
marijuana after the “devastating consequence” of having lost his scholarship on account of drug use.
The Judge characterized his history of marijuana use as a pattern of behavior that impugns his
willingness to follow rules and regulations.  Id.  She noted Applicant’s argument that his honorable
service, good duty performance, and self-reporting demonstrate trustworthiness.  However, she
stated that his eventual self reporting did not lessen the significance of his underlying conduct.  By
using marijuana, Applicant had voluntarily disregarded the fiduciary relationship with the
Government that was conferred by his access to classified information.  The Judge concluded that,
3
after considering all of the evidence, she had lingering doubts about Applicant’s judgment and
trustworthiness.
Discussion
Applicant cites to favorable evidence, such as his having held a clearance for several years
without incident or concern, his service in the military and as a Defense contractor, and his candor
in admitting his past drug use.  These are matters that the Judge was required to consider, along with
all the other evidence in the record.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s having first
received a clearance in 2001, his eight years of honorable military service, and his admission of
wrongdoing.  Moreover, she discussed his admission in some detail in her Analysis.  Applicant’s
argument on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).
Applicant contends that his earlier drug use had already been considered during his previous
clearance adjudication and should not weigh heavily in evaluating his current trustworthiness.
However, the Government is not precluded from making an adverse clearance decision even though
there were prior favorable adjudications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-17383 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb.
12, 2009).  A Judge must evaluate the record evidence as a whole, and it is proper for a Judge to
consider previously mitigated conduct in light of more recent security concerns.  Applicant’s
argument is not sufficient to show that the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 09-01970 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2010).  Neither is it sufficient to impugn the Judge’s
whole-person analysis, as Applicant contends.  See ISCR Case No. 08-02464 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 16,
2009).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed; William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
