 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05313 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On May 21, 2014, Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing if his Answer did not resolve the security 
concerns. This case was assigned to me on July 15, 2014. On July 23, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling 
the hearing for August 12, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, while Applicant testified, called his wife as a witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A though F. The record of the proceeding was left open until August 26, 2014, to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to present additional matters. He submitted documents 
that were marked as AE G through AA.1 All proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The prehearing guidance letter sent to Applicant was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1) and Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked 
as HE 2. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on August 21, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old aircraft mechanic who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been working for his current employer since March 2010. He graduated from 
high school in 1981. He served in the Marine Corps from November 1981 to November 
1987, in the Army Reserve from August 1991 to June 1997, and in the Air Force 
Reserve from June 1997 to present. He is currently serving in the grade of master 
sergeant (E-7). He has been married three times. His first marriage was from 1982 to 
1991. His next marriage was from 2002 to 2004. He married his current wife in 
November 2006. He has five children, ranging in age from 20 to 31. Applicant held a 
security clearance without incident for the past 14 years and for four years while serving 
in the Marine Corps. He indicated that he requires a security clearance for his military 
and civilian positions.2 
  
The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling $118,589 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a–1.f). The largest debt was a judgment in the amount of $100,659 entered against 
him in July 2005 for a mortgage loan. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and neither admitted nor denied the remaining allegations. His 
comments concerning the other allegations are considered denials. Credit reports in the 
record and Applicant’s security clearance application provide substantial evidence of the 
alleged debts.3 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his second divorce and identity 
theft. About eleven years ago, his second wife had an affair with his then 18-year-old 
son. From about 2005 to 2008, his son and ex-wife stole his identity. Without 
                                                          
1 Tr. 29-30. The record of the proceeding was initially left open until August 19, 2014 and, in 
response to a request from Applicant, extended to August 26, 2014. See AE G. 
2 Tr. 7-9, 33-34, 39-48; GE 1, 2. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
authorization, his son used Applicant’s credit card and opened accounts in Applicant’s 
name in cities and states in which Applicant did not live. His son has the same first and 
last name as him. Sometime between 2007 and 2009, Applicant learned of the identity 
theft when he attempted to buy an item on credit. He reported the identity theft to the 
police, signed up for a credit monitoring service, and placed a security freeze on his 
social security number. He also acknowledged that he made some mistakes and could 
have resolved these matters earlier.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – judgment entered against Applicant in July 2005 for $100,695. This 
was a mortgage loan on a house that Applicant purchased in 2003 when he was 
married to his second wife. The house had two mortgage loans, one for $95,000 and 
another for $36,000. When he and his ex-wife separated, she remained in the house 
and he moved to another state. In 2005, the creditor obtained a judgment against 
Applicant for the amount noted above and the house was foreclosed. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant denied this debt. He stated that he called the creditor and was told it 
had no record of this account. He indicated that he disputed it online and was awaiting 
the results. At the hearing, he testified that he had no problem with satisfying debts that 
he owed, but he could not find anyone with whom to settle this debt. In his post-hearing 
submission, Applicant provided a letter from a mortgage lending company that indicated 
it acquired this account in February 2013 and its records reflected that the foreclosure 
proceeding began in May 2005, the foreclosure sale occurred in January 2006, and the 
“tradelines” indicated the account was closed with a zero balance.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d – collection accounts for $949, $5,486, and $1,955, 
respectively. These were credit union accounts from the same creditor. Applicant 
indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b was his account, but the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d 
were accounts that resulted from his son stealing his identity. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant provided documents showing that he paid each of these debts in full in 
February 2014. These debts are resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $1,044. This was a telecommunications 
account. This account was opened by Applicant’s son without his authorization. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation showing that he settled this 
account in May 2014. Even though the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e were not 
Applicant’s, he indicated that he paid them “to show good faith because I need my 
security clearance.”7 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-38, 45-50, 62-66; GE 1, 2; AE F. 
5 Tr. 51-57; GE 2, 3; AE A, D, Z, AA; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Attachment A. 
6 Tr. 57-60, 62-65; GE 2, 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Attachments B, C, D. 
7 Tr. 61, 65-68; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Attachment E. 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $8,392. This was a truck loan that he cosigned 
with his ex-wife during his second marriage. As part of their divorce, Applicant and his 
ex-wife verbally agreed that she would retain the truck and also be responsible for the 
monthly loan payments. At some point, she stopped making the monthly payments and 
apparently turned in the truck to the creditor. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
provided documentation showing that he entered into a repayment arrangement with 
the creditor. Under that arrangement, he agreed to make a onetime payment of $2,794 
and to pay $233 per month for three years. He noted the payments are made by 
automatic withdrawals from his checking account and provided documentation showing 
he made the monthly payments for March through August 2014. This debt is being 
resolved.8 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. His annual salary is $66,000. On 
February 23, 2014, he submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected 
his total net monthly income was $6,982, his total monthly expenses were $1,020, and 
his total monthly debt payments were $3,671, which left him a net monthly remainder of 
$2,291. He indicated that he had about $8,100 in a bank account and over $80,000 in 
401(k) and Thrift Savings Plan accounts.9 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she has been a teacher in public schools for 19 
years. She has two master’s degrees and is working on her doctorate. She places great 
importance on honesty and ethical decision-making. She indicated that she and her 
husband live within their means while providing for their children. She stated that her 
husband works very hard, is dedicated to the military, does what is right, and doing what 
is right is his nature. She also indicated that her husband participated in rescue 
missions during Hurricane Katrina and has mentored younger airmen.10 
 
Applicant has received a Meritorious Service Medal, Army Commendation Medal, 
two Army Achievement Medals, and other personal and unit awards. His enlisted 
performance evaluation dated February 10, 2013, indicated that he was “truly among 
the best.” A senior master sergeant indicated that Applicant is a strong senior non-
commissioned officer who is selfless and goal oriented. He received a certificate of 
appreciation for his civilian position and high praise from a team manager.11 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
                                                          
8 Tr. 58, 60-61, 77-83; GE 2; AE I-L; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Attachment F. 
9 Tr. 68-75; GE 2; AE B-F. 
10 Tr. 86-95. 
11 AE H, M-U, W. 
 
5 
 
 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
6 
 
 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
In this case, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy for an extended period. This evidence established the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts arose from unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur. In 
2004, he went through a divorce. His son, who had an affair with his ex-wife, used 
Applicant’s identity to open accounts without his authorization. While his divorce and the 
theft of his identity were conditions beyond his control that contributed to his financial 
problems, Applicant acknowledged that he made mistakes in handling his financial 
problems and could have resolved them earlier. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) partially apply. 
 
 Applicant provided a letter from the company holding the mortgage loan in SOR 
¶ 1.a. This company indicated it acquired this account in February 2013 and its records 
reflected that the foreclosure sale occurred in January 2006, and the “tradelines” 
indicated the account was closed with a zero balance.  Applicant provided sufficient 
evidence to dispute this debt. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt.  
 
 In February 2014, Applicant paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. In May 
2014, Applicant settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. Even though the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, and 1.e were the result of identity theft, he paid those to show good-faith in 
handling his financial problems. In February 2014, he entered into a repayment 
agreement on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f and, so far, has paid $4,192 toward this debt. 
Applicant financial problems are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has served in the military for about 30 years and has attained the 
grade of master sergeant. He has held a security clearance for about 18 years without 
incident. A recent enlisted performance evaluation indicated that he is “truly among the 
best.” He is a valued civilian employee. He has acted responsibly in resolving his debts. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
  
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
