Item 4.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-05007
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant had a number of minor delinquent debts when he began his current
employment almost three years ago. Since then he has been financially responsible and
resolved almost all previous debts. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based
on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on January 17,
2012.  On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications1
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken2
Item 3. 3
The Government submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. 4
Item 4; Item 5 at 50.5
Item 3. SOR ¶ 1.l will be treated as if it was denied by Applicant.6
Item 5.7
2
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR (Answer) on May 16, 2014,
and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
June 19, 2014. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided4
to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on July 7, 2014. He submitted additional material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation
within the 30-day period thereafter. He made no objection to consideration of any
contents of the FORM, and did not request additional time to respond. I received the
case assignment on July 21, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 28 years old, and married with one child. He enlisted in the Air Force
after graduating from high school in 2004. He was administratively separated in August
2006 for a pattern of minor misconduct, with a general discharge under honorable
conditions. He then worked as an avionics technician until entering college in August
2009. He left school and resumed working as an avionics technician in April 2010. He
was hired by his present employer, a defense contractor, in October 2011.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b,
1.n, 1.o, and 1.p. He denied the remaining allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.l, which
he did not answer.  Applicant’s admissions, including those made in response to6
interrogatories from the DoD CAF,  are incorporated into the following findings of fact.7
Applicant had a number of delinquent debts in early 2012, as reflected in the Full
Data Credit Report and Personal Subject Interview obtained by the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in January and March, respectively, of that year. The SOR, issued
more than two years later, primarily reflects that outdated information. Applicant’s
Item 1; Item 5; Item 7.8
Item 3; Item 5 at 18; Item 7 at 6.9
The only evidence about this debt is an Experian entry showing it in collections in 2013. Item 5 at 19.10
Item 3; FORM Response (Chase statement).11
Item 7 at 8.12
Item 7 at 4.13
Item 5.14
3
personal financial statement, reflecting his monthly earnings and expenses in December
2013, shows a surplus of $1,625 with a net income of $4,099 and only one regular debt
payment toward a credit card that is in a current status.8
The record evidence establishes five SOR-alleged debts that were not
adequately shown to have been resolved. Applicant claimed to have paid the $88
medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but provided no proof of payment that could be linked to
verify it. It was reported to be delinquent and outstanding by Experian on credit reports
in January 2012 and October 2013.  He also said that he paid the $63 utility debt9
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but provided no proof that it was resolved.  Applicant admitted10
that he owed the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($264), 1.n ($113), and 1.p
($30), in his Answer. He said that all could be paid immediately, but did not submit
evidence from which I could conclude that he has done so. The total amount of these
five potentially unresolved debts is $558.
Applicant provided documentation clearly establishing that he resolved the
formerly delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.m.  In his Answer,11
Applicant said that he admitted the $1,028 delinquent cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶
1.o with the notation that he was working with the creditor. Analysis of the record credit
reports reveals that SOR ¶ 1.o is based on a January 2012 Experian report by a
collection agency that acquired the debt in August 2011.  The resolved debt alleged in12
SOR ¶ 1.g was originally owed to the same cell phone company, but reported on
Experian in 2009 by a different collection agency.  Applicant provided a more recent13
October 2013 Experian credit report as an attachment to his response to DoD CAF
interrogatories,  and a May 2014 3-Bureau credit report in his FORM response, neither14
of which report this debt in connection with any of the respective creditors. I conclude
that SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.o are duplicate allegations of the same former debt, which
Applicant resolved.
The $21,612 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d refers to the original loan amount for a
vehicle that Applicant purchased in February 2007. It is reported as the “High Credit” or
“High Balance” amount in the record credit reports. In December 2007, Applicant was
unable to make the $530 monthly payment due to a reduction in hours at work, and
initiated the voluntary repossession of the vehicle. The lender accepted possession of
Item 3; Item 4 at 40; Item 5 at 11-12, 19-20; Item 7 at 8; FORM Response.  This debt does not appear on15
Item 6, Applicant’s most recent credit report, which shows him current on payments toward a $35,000 auto
loan he took out in January 2014. 
Item 7 at 6, 9; Item 6.16
Item 7 at 5; Item 5 at 16-22.17
4
the vehicle and charged off any remaining debt, resulting in a zero ($0) balance due on
the loan, as reported on all record credit reports. This debt is resolved.      15
Of the five remaining debts alleged in the SOR, four (¶¶ 1.e, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.q)
were minor debts that became delinquent in 2005, 2006, and 2008, as reported only by
Equifax on Applicant’s 2012 OPM credit report. His June 2014 Equifax credit report
does not reflect that any of these debts remain outstanding or unresolved.  Similarly,16
the $125 delinquency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is based on a February 2006 report to
Experian that appeared on his OPM credit report. It does not appear on his October
2013 Experian credit report.  Accordingly, the record supports Applicant’s denial of17
these debts in his Answer, on the basis that they were paid. 
Applicant’s submissions in response to the SOR and FORM are primarily
financial documents reflecting various payments, some of which are not readily
identifiable in connection with particular SOR allegations. He is representing himself,
and is an avionics technician with a high school diploma, so the less-than-
comprehensive nature of his submissions will not be adversely attributed in evaluating
his attempts to supply documentation requested by the Government. Among the
documents he submitted are copies of several payments of $282.39 that he made to
“Financial Adjustment Services.” Presumably, this service was involved with achieving
the resolution of the debts discussed above. 
Applicant submitted no evidence of formal financial counseling. He provided no
evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, the level of
responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive
information and observation of security procedures. He submitted no character
references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his
case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
6
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence is sufficient to initially
raise, security concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant’s January 2012 credit report, obtained shortly after submission of his
SF 86, showed about fifteen relatively small delinquent debts with a total outstanding
balance due of about $7,600. Those debts arose at various times during the preceding
seven years, before Applicant obtained his current employment. Applicant’s response to
DoD CAF interrogatories did not address these debts in detail, or demonstrate their
resolution. This evidence raised security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s most recent credit report (Item 6) contains only one entry concerning
a delinquent debt: the $264 credit card account that was closed and charged off in
2010, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant has incurred no new delinquencies since
7
obtaining his present employment in late 2011, and sufficiently demonstrated resolution
of most prior debts during that period. He has enough monthly surplus income to make
recurrence of financial problems unlikely, and his record over the past three years  does
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence
therefore establishes some mitigation under MC 20(a). 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support mitigation under MC 20(b). His
short period of unemployment after separation from the Air Force for misconduct was
attributable to his actions, and he asserted no other hardship that may have interfered
with his ability to address some obligations between 2005 and 2011. 
Applicant offered no evidence of formal financial counseling, but did establish
clear indications that his earlier financial problems have been largely resolved, and that
his budget is under control. He demonstrated successful efforts to repay or otherwise
resolve all but a few minor SOR-alleged debts. Only one $264 debt that was charged off
in 2010 remains on his most recent credit report. This evidence shows additional
mitigation under MC 20(c) and 20(d). Applicant did not deny the initial validity of any
SOR-listed debt, or otherwise seek to establish mitigation under MC 20(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
adult, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security
concerns expressed in the SOR. His financial irresponsibility predated his current
employment, and involved relatively minor delinquent debts that he incurred between
ages 19 and 25. Over the past three years, he has demonstrated financial responsibility,
and all but a few small debts were demonstrably resolved during that period. This
8
shows increased maturity, rehabilitation, and significantly reduced potential for
pressure, coercion, or duress.  
The record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security
concerns arising from his financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.q: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                            
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
