 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03393 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Despite the negative entries on her 
credit report, Applicant provided evidence that she settled the debts alleged in the SOR 
well before applying for a security clearance in October 2011. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on August 20, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, as 
well as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on September 2, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 34, works for a federal contractor as a security-control supervisor at an 
international airport. Hired in 2002 as a screener, Applicant was promoted to her current 
position in 2007. Applicant completed a security clearance application, her first, in 
October 2011. The subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant owed 
five delinquent credit card accounts to three creditors, totaling $49,500. These accounts 
were ultimately alleged in the SOR.3 
 
In 2005, Applicant and her brother purchased two homes together. Each property 
was purchased using adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) loans. Each sibling maintained 
their respective loans until 2008 when both loans adjusted, doubling the payment on 
each home. Applicant and her brother tried to obtain modifications on the loans. During 
the four months they waited for approval, Applicant exhausted her financial resources to 
keep the loans current. She depleted her savings and used credit cards. By the time 
Applicant and her brother received approval for the loan modifications, the mortgage 
lender had foreclosed on and sold both homes.4 
  
After the losing the homes, Applicant closed her credit card accounts and tried to 
resolve the debts, but the interest and fees began increasing without explanation. Soon, 
Applicant could not afford to pay the accounts and they became delinquent. For several 
months, Applicant tried to work with the credit card companies directly to renegotiate the 
terms and resolve her accounts. In 2010, Applicant retained an attorney to help her 
resolve her credit card debt. At her attorney’s direction, Applicant wrote each creditor to 
dispute the debt, in particular the interest rate and fees applied to each account. None 
of the creditors responded to Applicant’s dispute letters. Applicant then sent each 
creditor a settlement offer along with a letter explaining that she would take acceptance 
of the payment as satisfaction of the debts. Two of the creditors cashed Applicant’s 
checks for ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. in October 2010. The third creditor accepted payments on ¶¶ 
1.c. and 1.d in April 2011. Six months after each creditor accepted Applicant’s 
payments, her attorney sent a letter to each creditor informing them that each account 
was considered resolved by an accord and satisfaction under applicable state law and 
requested that each creditor report the debts as settled to the credit reporting agencies. 
                                                          
2 To assist in her preparation for the hearing, Applicant received correspondence from Department 
Counsel and the Chief Administrative Judge. These letters are appended to the record as Appellate 
Exhibits (AP) I and II. 
 
3 Tr. 17, 45-46; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 18-19, 30-35, 40, 48-53, 55-58.  
 
 
3 
 
Although none of the creditors have provided updates to the credit reporting agencies, 
none have made any further collection attempts against Applicant.5 
 
Applicant contacted the creditor to establish the validity of the debt alleged in ¶ 
1.e. The creditor provided Applicant a document listing all of the accounts she had with 
them, including those sold to third parties for collections. Based on the list, the creditor 
was unable to validate the account, which appears only the November 2011 credit 
report, the earliest of the five credit reports in the record.6  
 
Applicant has no other delinquent debt or any other history of financial problems. 
Applicant is now married, with one child and expecting a second. She and her husband 
own their home. She is current on her recurring bills and has no other delinquent 
accounts. For the first time since closing her credit card accounts in 2008, Applicant 
opened a credit card account in an effort to rehabilitate her credit score.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. 19-25; 41-45, 54; Answer. 
 
6 Tr. 25-26; GE 3; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. 37-40; GE 7. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to three creditors for 
approximately $49,500. Although Applicant denies the allegations, each debt alleged in 
the SOR is substantiated by the credit reports in the record.9 Applicant’s failure to pay 
the debts demonstrates an inability to pay her debts and a history, albeit a brief one, of 
not doing so.10  
 
However, the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
concern. Applicant does not have a history of financial problems. She incurred debt for 
a limited time and purpose under circumstances unlikely to recur and that do not cast 
doubt on her current security worthiness.11 Although Applicant’s financial problems were 
not entirely beyond her control (she was aware that the homes were purchased with 
ARM loans and were scheduled to adjust in three years) she did act responsibly to 
resolve her financial issues.12 Applicant closed the accounts after the homes were sold. 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 GE 3 – 7. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 AG  ¶ 20(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
5 
 
When she realized that she was unable to resolve her credit card debt on her own, she 
retained an attorney to act on her behalf. With the attorney’s help, Applicant settled four 
of the five accounts (¶¶ 1.a-1.d). Applicant’s actions indicate a good-faith effort to 
resolve her delinquent debts.13 Because Applicant cannot control the information her 
creditors report to the credit agencies, her efforts mitigate the security concern even 
though the four accounts continue to report as negative entries on her credit reports. 
She also provided sufficient evidence of her legitimate dispute of the account alleged in 
¶ 1.e.14  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant took 
reasonable steps to address her delinquent debts as soon as practicable after losing 
two homes to foreclosure. She sought and relied upon professional help to resolve her 
debts well before she applied for a security clearance in October 2011. Applicant’s 
actions reflect the contentiousness required of those seeking access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
14 AG ¶ 20(e). 
