KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by substantial record
evidence.  Failure to provide truthful answers during the clearance investigation process is of
special interest in evaluating an applicant’s worthiness for a clearance.  We cannot consider
evidence from outside the record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-03970.a1
DATE: 09/30/2014
DATE: September 30, 2014
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-03970
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 27, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July
25, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Mary E. Henry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in some of her
findings of fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  She was terminated from a previous employment
for having violated her company’s policy.  Specifically, she asked a fellow employee, who worked
in information technology (IT), to obtain a non-business document from the computer of another
employee, whom Applicant was dating.  The IT employee reported this request to the facility
security officer (FSO), who, in turn, notified the employer’s human resources office.
The employer suspended Applicant pending an investigation.  Upon completion of the
investigation, the company fired Applicant.  In completing a subsequent security clearance
application (SCA) in 2007, Applicant answered “no” to a question about whether, within the
previous seven years, she had been fired or otherwise had left a job due to allegations of misconduct.
She completed another SCA in 2011, again denying that she had been fired, etc, within the previous
seven years.  In this SCA, she also denied having been disciplined for misconduct in the workplace,
“such as a violation of company security policy.”  Decision at 7.  These answers were false, in view
of her job termination in 2006.
Applicant was interviewed in 2012 as part of her clearance investigation.  She told the
interviewer that she had been laid off from her prior employer.  She stated that she had received
verbal warnings about tardiness.  One month later, the investigator re-interviewed Applicant.  She
again denied any disciplinary action other than the verbal warnings.  When specifically asked if she
had been fired or had left a job under unfavorable circumstances, she stated that she had not,
insisting that she had been laid off.  When confronted with the investigation report, which included
a letter of apology Applicant had written concerning her misconduct, she denied any memory of the
matter.  In her response to the SOR and at the hearing she continued to deny an intent to falsify her
answers, claiming that she could not recall the incident.
The Judge made extensive findings about Applicant’s character evidence.  She enjoys a good
reputation for her honesty and trustworthiness.  However, not all of her references evidenced
knowledge of her security significant conduct.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant’s on-the-job misconduct, along with her omissions and false
statements, raised concerns under Guideline E.  She stated that Applicant was well aware of the
unfavorable circumstances surrounding her job loss and that the SCA questions were clear.  The
Judge found that Applicant had deliberately omitted the information from her SCAs.  She also found
that Applicant’s false answers during her clearance interviews were deliberate, noting that, even
when presented with documents outlining the entire matter, Applicant claimed to have no memory
3
of it.  The Judge found that Applicant had mitigated concerns arising from her misconduct in 2006.
However, she concluded that Applicant had not mitigated concerns arising from her numerous false
statements.  The Judge noted evidence of Applicant’s good work record and the laudatory comments
by her witnesses and character references.  However, she stated that a clearance investigation
requires complete honesty at each step and that Applicant had failed to live up to that requirement.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that she had deliberately provided false information
during the processing of her case.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the conflicting evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In evaluating an
applicant’s mens rea, we consider the omissions or false statements in light of the record as a whole.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03415 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
In this case, we note the Judge’s extensive findings in support of her conclusion that
Applicant was aware that she had been fired due to misconduct and had not simply been laid off.
We note the clarity of the SCA questions, and we note in particular Applicant’s continued denial of
wrongdoing during her interview despite persistent questioning by the investigator.  Given the
evidence as a whole, no reasonable person in Applicant’s circumstances could honestly have
believed that her denials were truthful.  The Judge’s findings about the deliberate nature of
Applicant’s many false statements are supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in finding that she had committed the
misconduct that led to her firing.  However, Government Exhibit 5, Counseling Notice with
attachments (including the letter of apology by Applicant), supports the challenged finding.  The
Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record evidence. 
Applicant argues that her circumstances do not raise concern under Guideline E.  This
argument is predicated on her assertion that she was simply laid off from her job and that she had
not falsified her SCAs or provided false answers during her interview.  Given our conclusion that
the Judge’s findings are supported by substantial evidence, however, we find no merit in this
argument.  Failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the clearance process is “of special
interest” in evaluating an applicant’s worthiness for a clearance.  Refusal to provide truthful answers
to lawful questions in connection with a security determination “will normally result in an
unfavorable clearance action[.]” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.
 
Applicant cites to her favorable evidence, such as a her good work performance and her
testimony that she believed she had been laid off rather than fired.  She also argues that there is no
evidence of other “personal conduct issues.”  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither is it sufficient to
show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06824 at 2 (App. Bd.
Apr. 9, 2014).  
4
In support of her appeal, Applicant has cited to other Hearing Offices cases in which, she
argues, applicants similarly situated to her received clearances.  We give these cases due
consideration as persuasive authority.  However, Hearing Office cases are binding neither on other
Hearing Office Judges nor on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 5 (App. Bd.
Jul. 28, 2014).  These cases do not undermine the Judge’s adverse decision.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
