KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s challenged finding is drawn from the interview summary certified by
Applicant as accurate.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-03270.a1
DATE: 09/17/2014
DATE: September 17, 2014
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-03270
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 26, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
2
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On June 5, 2014, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant entered the military in 1984, retiring in 2009.  He began working for a Defense
contractor upon his retirement.  He held a clearance while on active duty and has retained it during
his civilian employment.  He is married with three adult children.
Applicant’s SOR alleges eleven delinquent debts.  The Judge found that he had resolved two
of them but that the remaining nine were ongoing.  He stated that Applicant had presented no
evidence that he had paid, resolved, or disputed these debts.  Rather, Applicant simply contended
that the debts were no longer listed in his credit reports.  The Judge found that these debts were
either charged off, referred for collection, or purchased by other creditors.  During his clearance
interview, Applicant stated that he did not intend to pay his charged off debts.  He offered no
explanation for his financial situation, except to say that his debts “‘snowballed’ because of
excessive spending.”  Decision at 2.  His monthly net pay is $5,085, and his expenditures are $4,381,
leaving a remainder of $704.  
The Judge’s Analysis  
The Judge concluded that, except for the two mentioned above, Applicant’s debts are
ongoing, numerous, and not the result of circumstances beyond his control.  He has not sought
financial counseling, and he has not disputed the legitimacy of his debts.  His only response to his
financial situation is to assert that his debts are not reflected on his most current credit report.
However, the Judge stated that this proves nothing about the debts except their age.  “[M]erely
waiting for a debt to drop off a credit report by the passage of time is not a factor in an applicant’s
favor.”  Id. at 5.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that Applicant’s choice of a decision
without a hearing precluded him from evaluating Applicant’s demeanor or questioning him in more
depth about his debts.  Though acknowledging Applicant’s years of service in the military, he found
that all but one of Applicant’s debts had become delinquent during the course of that service.
Despite continuous employment with a steady income, Applicant has not undertaken to address his
debts.  The Judge concluded that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion regarding
mitigation.  
Discussion
1Applicant’s brief makes repeated reference to his unsuccessful efforts to find an attorney.  To the extent that
he is asserting that his ability to present his case was impaired by the absence of counsel, we note that he was properly
advised of his right to representation.  He was also advised of his right to submit matters in response to the File of
Relevant Material yet failed to do so.  Pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers but are expected to take
reasonable steps to protect their interests.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  There is
no reason to believe that Applicant was denied due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02296 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 12,
2014).  
3
Much of Applicant’s appeal brief contains information from outside the record.  We cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.1  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  See ISCR Case No. 12-04554 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).   Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had told his interviewer that
he would not pay his charged-off debts.  He claims that this is not an accurate depiction of his
answer.  The Judge’s finding is drawn from the interviewer’s summary of Applicant’s answers,
which Applicant had certified as accurate. Interview Summary at 3, 6, included in Item 6, Answers
to Interrogatories.  Applicant’s argument on appeal is not sufficient to undermine the challenged
findings.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon substantial record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  Applicant cites to
evidence that he has paid certain debts.  The Judge made findings about the two SOR debts
Applicant had resolved, but he reasonably concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the remaining
nine.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record.  Neither has he shown that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 11-06925 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2013).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  See ISCR Case No. 09-
01309 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 29, 2010) (Failure to discharge debts is a continuing course of conduct,
precluding a finding that they are too old to have security significance).  The decision is sustainable
on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
4
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
