 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-029281 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 2, 2011, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On February 26, 2014, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
                                                          
1
 The correct case number is ISCR 12-02928. The SOR was corrected to show it. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant contended he made a mistake 
on dates of marijuana use. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
On April 2, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on April 3, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on April 9, 2014. 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that would have 
expired on May 9, 2014. The Department Counsel had no objection to this Response. I 
received the case assignment on September 12, 2014. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied in part the allegations in Subparagraph 1.a and admitted part of 
them. He denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b. (Items 2-4)  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is married and has one child. He works for a 
defense contractor. He has been employed there since 1992. (Items 6-8) 
 
 Applicant stated on his 2011 e-QIP that he used illegal drugs during the past 
seven years from January 1995 until June 2008 in answer to Section 23 concerning the 
“Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity.” Applicant stated it was a marijuana cigarette he 
smoked, used infrequently, perhaps every other year. He confirmed those dates and 
usage during the investigation by the government investigator in February 2012. During 
the interview Applicant stated he used the marijuana in a pipe and cigarette form. 
Applicant received a security clearance in 1992 and it was renewed in 2002. He used 
the marijuana outside of work for the defense contractor. (Items 4m 6-8) 
 
 Applicant now asserts he made a mistake on the dates of usage of the 
marijuana. He really meant to admit that his use was from 2005 to 2008. He did not 
correct this mistake during the interview. He claims it was a clerical error on his part to 
type the wrong date on the e-QIP. Applicant states his nervousness made him not tell 
the investigator the actual date of his use was from 2005 instead of 1995. Applicant also 
contends his answer to the same question on his 2002 e-QIP was correct that he had 
not used illegal drugs in the previous seven years because his drug use started in 2005 
not 1995. Applicant admits he used marijuana from 2005 to 2008 while holding a 
security clearance. (Items 4, 6-8; Response) 
 
 Applicant requests “mercy” for his mistake. He also stated in his Response that 
his family had several problems in 2011. He asserted that the problems were that his 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
mother was dying, his father was overwhelmed with paperwork for his mother’s medical 
care, he traveled a lot for his employer so he could not help his father and mother 
regularly, he had a medical test for possible cancer, he had a lower back problem which 
necessitated a medical leave of absence, and he had to move from one house he 
owned but lost to foreclosure into a rental property because his house was foreclosed. 
Applicant also filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. It was discharged on July 5, 2012. (Items 4, 
6-8; Response)  
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 15, 2002. In 
response to Question 27 on that form he denied using illegal drugs in the previous 
seven years. In 2011 Applicant admitted using marijuana from 1995 to 2008, part of the 
time period covered by his answer on his 2002 security clearance application form. 
Applicant confirmed that time period during his 2012 investigation by the U.S. 
Government. Therefore, he used an illegal drug while holding a security clearance from 
1992 to 2002. (Items 3, 4, 6-8; Response) 
 
 Applicant submitted two character statements. They are from co-workers at his 
place of employment. They state Applicant is dependable and hard working. The 
authors also state Applicant is loyal and professional in his work. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant’s credibility, demeanor, or character in person could not be evaluated 
because he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three conditions apply: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant admitted to illegal drug use by smoking marijuana in a pipe or a 
cigarette on various occasions from January 1995 to June 2008. He had to possess the 
marijuana to smoke it. He had a security clearance from 1992 onward and used the 
marijuana for 13 years during the term of his access to classified information. These 
three disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 Applicant used marijuana for 13 years. He admits to not using for the past six 
years. He has not supplied any objective evaluation concerning his drug relationship. 
He also did not submit any urinalysis to show any current marijuana usage. He claims 
his marijuana use was really from 2005 to 2008, not from 1995 to 2008. His attempts to 
lessen the term of his drug use undermine his credibility even on the issue of his term of 
marijuana use. The marijuana use was not long ago and did not happen under unusual 
circumstances that make it unlikely to recur. While Applicant claims he only used it once 
a year, there is no evidence to verify that claim. His actions case serious doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, primarily because he used 
marijuana while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 26 (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant claims he has abstained from marijuana use since the summer of 
2008. There is no independent or medical verification of that assertion. The remaining 
portions of AG ¶ 26 (b) also do not apply. 
 
 Prescription drugs were not at issue in Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 26 (c) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant has not attended or completed a prescribed drug treatment program. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 26 (d) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes six disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
 (e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his marijuana use on his 2002 security clearance 
application. His falsification was used to obtain a security clearance for Applicant’s work 
continuation. That non-disclosure conduct, referring to his marijuana use until 2008, if 
made known publically, would create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by having an adverse effect on his professional and community standing. AG ¶ 
16 (a) and (e) apply.  
 
Applicant typed the dates of “1995” and “2008” on his 2011 e-QIP. He now 
claims the “1995” should have been typed “2005.” However, it takes different key 
strokes of numbers on the computer terminal and a deliberate lack of visual verification 
before Applicant signed his name to the written attestation in the e-QIP that what he 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
typed was correct. Even if it were true, which is not credible in the total circumstances of 
the e-QIP, that Applicant did use marijuana only from 2005 to 2008, it would still mean 
he used it while holding a security clearance. The sanctions would be the same, the 
misleading of the government the same, and the actions the same, just a mere change 
in time. It does not make Applicant less liable for his misconduct.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. In 
Applicant’s case, none apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Applicant did not make prompt and good-faith efforts to correct his mistake. AG ¶ 
17 (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s falsification of two security clearance applications was not caused by 
advice from any authorized person or legal counsel. He did not correct his e-QIPs 
promptly. AG ¶ 17 (b) does not apply. 
 
The offense of smoking marijuana while holding a security clearance is not a 
minor offense nor is there accurate evidence that the use was infrequent. The 
circumstances were not unique. His family problems in 2011 did not affect his ability to 
accurately and truthfully answer the 2011 e-QIP question on his illegal drug use. AG ¶ 
17 (c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant did acknowledge his past marijuana use. However, he never obtained 
any counseling to alleviate any stressors in his life that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or inappropriate behavior. Such marijuana use could reoccur. AG ¶ 17 (d) 
does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17 (e) does not apply.  
 
The information supplied by Applicant is substantiated by his own admissions. 
AG ¶ 17 (f) does not apply.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant associated with persons involved in criminal 
activity. Therefore, AG ¶ 17 (g) is not applicable.  
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he used 
marijuana while holding a security clearance and working for a defense contractor. His 
actions were voluntary. There is no independent verification of his asserted abstinence. 
There is potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. It is likely that 
Applicant’s marijuana usage will reoccur. His attempts at altering the dates of his 
marijuana use to lessen the effect on his security clearance renewal are not persuasive 
or believable.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and substantial 
doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Drug Involvement. He did not mitigate the security concerns under the 
guideline for Personal Conduct. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
