                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 12-02034
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katuaskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On December 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 17, 2014, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 25, 2014, and did not respond to the FORM. The case was
assigned to me on September 12, 2014.    
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to timely file his federal income
tax returns for tax years 2004 through 2012; (b) failed to timely file his state tax returns
for tax years 2004 through 2012; (c) incurred an adverse judgment on a medical debt in
June 2011 for $13,043; (d) incurred an adverse judgment in June 2009 for $3,482; (e)
incurred an adverse common property owners association judgment in June 2010 for
$2,710; and (f) incurred an adverse judgment in September 2007 for $3,613. Allegedly,
each of the alleged adverse monetary judgments remain unpaid. (Item 1)
In his response to the SOR (Item 4), Applicant admitted the allegations covered
by the SOR with explanations.  He claimed he does not gamble or live beyond his
means. He claimed his current salary is more than sufficient to meet his financial
obligations. He claimed his failure to meet his obligations was due to grief and
depression following his wife’s death. He claimed his wife handled almost all of his
financial activities. And he claimed he did not learn of his outstanding obligations until
almost a year after her death.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old communications engineer of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as a relevant and material finding.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married his first spouse in December 1979 and divorced her in October
1992. (Item 5) He married his second spouse in November 1992; she passed away in
June 2010. (Items 5 and 6) Applicant has no children from either marriage. Applicant
earned college credits in 1978-1979 but no degree or diploma. (Item 5) He completed
20 years of active service in the Navy and was honorably retired. (Item 5)
Applicant’s finances
Before her death in June 2010, Applicant’s wife handled all of their finances and
tax filings. (Items 4 and 6) Not until August 2011 did Applicant learn that his federal and
state tax returns for tax years 2004 through 2012 had not been filed. (Items 4 and 6) He
was similarly unaware that adverse judgments had been taken against him.  Applicant
has since filed all of his back federal returns, but has not filed state returns for the same
back years.  Afforded an opportunity to document his filing of his  past state tax returns
and judgment satisfactions, Applicant provided no documented filing or payment
actions, or evidence of any disputed judgment debts covered in the SOR. 
                              
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
3
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it
may lead to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be
explained by known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and
state income tax returns and satisfy his four unpaid judgments. Applicant’s recurrent
problems with managing his finances over a considerable period of time reflect lapses of
judgment in administering his financial responsibilities.  
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the delinquent tax filings and judgment debts
covered in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof. See ISCR Case No. 94-
1159 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 1995( (“any admissions [applicant] made to the SOR
allegations . . . relieve Department Counsel of its burden of proof”’). See, generally,
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006).  Each of Applicant’s listed tax filing
deficiencies and judgment debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his filing lapses and debts.
While married to his second spouse, Applicant relied on his spouse to file his tax
returns, pay his creditors, and manage his finances. Between 2004 and 2012, Applicant
failed to timely file his 2004-2012 federal and state tax returns and address his  debts.
Citing his wife’s health problems and ultimate demise in June 2010, he incurred four
5
separate adverse judgments (between 2007 and 2010). Not until after his wife passed
away did he learn of his delinquent tax filings and adverse judgments. While he has
since filed his overdue federal tax returns, he has provided no documentation of his filing
his state returns and satisfying the outstanding judgments taken against him between
2007 and 2010.
With ample monetary resources at his disposal to monitor and satisfy any
overdue tax returns and outstanding judgments, Applicant could be expected to to make
more concerted efforts to make sure his state tax returns were timely filed and his
outstanding debts paid. Applicant’s actions warrant the application of three of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts;”  DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and DC ¶
19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the
fraudulent filing of the same.” 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.
While potentially extenuating, Applicant’s reliance on his wife to administer his
finances are not sufficiently developed to definitively affix sole filing and payment
responsibility on his wife, himself, or a combination thereof.  This is especially true since
his wife passed away in 2010 and he has had several years to show more progress in
addressing his finances. As a result, neither MC ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened a long
time ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” nor MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibly,” have any more than partial application. 
Applicant’s finances have been marked by recurrent periods of instability for a
number of years and show insufficient signs of stabilizing. He still must address his back
state income tax returns and outstanding money judgments before he can restore his
finances to acceptable levels of stability commensurate with holding a security
clearance.  While Applicant has filed his federal taxes he has not addressed either his
state taxes or outstanding judgments.
 Full mitigation credit is difficult to establish with Applicant’s history of total
reliance on his expired spouse to manage his finances.  Afforded opportunities to follow
through in the filing of his state tax returns and satisfaction of his outstanding state
income tax returns, Applicant has failed to document any follow-through on his state tax
filings and judgment debts. His financial history reveals little attention to exploring
payment initiatives before or after the issuance of the SOR.  
6
While an applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, the
applicant needs to establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve identified
financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR
Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  While Applicant’s addressing of his
delinquent federal income tax returns is encouraging, his efforts to date do not reflect
any headway with his remaining tax filing and judgment debts.  More is needed of
Applicant with the resources currently available to him. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reveals recurrent lapses of
judgment associated with Applicant’s multiple failures to timely file his federal and state
income tax returns and address his outstanding adverse money judgments. His partial
mitigation efforts over the past year, while encouraging, are not enough to demonstrate
a strong track record of timely tax filing and debt satisfaction.  
Without any evidence of work performance or community and civic contributions
to weigh and consider, there is little evidence in the record by which to make a whole-
person assessment of Applicant’s accomplishments in his business and personal life.
Overall, Applicant’s efforts to date are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the AGs governing his finances.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subpara. 1.a: For Applicant
Subparas. 1.b-1.f:           Against Applicant   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
