 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-04786 
  ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, were 
withdrawn. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOD CAF took that action under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s access to sensitive information. On May 5, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on July 15, 
2014. On July 23, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for August 14, 2014. The hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though G. All proffered 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The prehearing guidance letter 
sent to Applicant was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1) and Department Counsel’s list 
of exhibits was marked as HE 2. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on 
August 25, 2014. 
 
Procedural Matter 
 
 Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw the sole Guideline E allegation. 
Applicant had no objection to that motion. Department Counsel’s motion was granted 
and the Guideline E allegation was withdrawn.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old computer systems engineer. He has been working in 
the same position for different contractors since March 2011. He graduated from high 
school in 1992 and has completed about two years of college. He served in the U.S. 
Navy from 1993 to 1994 and was honorably discharged. He has been married twice. He 
married his current wife in 1999. He has two children, ages 16 and 21, from his first 
marriage and three children, ages 5, 6, and 13 from his current marriage. His oldest 
child is emancipated and his 16-year-old child from his first marriage lives with him. This 
is the first time Applicant has sought a position of trust.2 
  
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had 11 delinquent debts 
totaling $40,246 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.k). He admitted or denied the SOR allegations as 
indicated below.3 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a combination of reasons. In 2010, 
Applicant left a job that he had for about ten years to work for a competitor. He worked 
at that new job from September 2010 to January 2011, when he was laid off due to a 
slowdown in the economy. He was unemployed from January to March 2011. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11-12. 
2 Tr. 6, 9, 26-29, 31-33, 39-40; GE 1, 2; AE G. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s wife also experienced lengthy periods of unemployment due to medical 
issues, but has been employed for the past four years.4  
 
Applicant is an only child. His parents have been living with him since 2005. His 
father was injured in about 2001, suffers from degenerative disc disease, and has 
undergone multiple back and neck surgeries. He also had a heart attack and stroke and 
suffers from heart disease. His father has limited mobility and is unable to work. 
Applicant provides room and board for his parents and also helps them pay about $300 
to $1,000 a month in medical bills.5 
 
Applicant also testified that, when his ex-wife had custody of his two oldest 
children, she would advise healthcare providers to send the children’s medical bills to 
Applicant without providing him any notice of the pending bills. He learned of the bills 
only after they were placed for collection. He indicated that the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f though 1.j fell into that category. He also testified that he shared the same first and 
last name and address as his father and stated that some of his father’s debts were 
improperly placed on his credit report.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $2,808. This debt was for a loan on a 
repossessed vehicle. Applicant admitted this debt. It became delinquent after he lost his 
job in 2011. In December 2013, he entered into an agreement with the creditor to make 
monthly payments of $100 until the debt was paid. He provided documentation showing 
that he made $100 payments from January to April 2014 and a $300 payment in July 
2014. This debt is being resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $1,554. This debt was a judgment that was 
entered against Applicant in July 2007. Applicant denied this debt. He claimed that he 
contacted the law firm handling this debt and was informed it had no record of him. He 
provided a letter from a law firm dated September 24, 2013, indicating that it had no 
record of him, but it did not identify any debt or indicate that the law firm was 
representing the judgment creditor. He also testified that he called the court inquiring 
about this judgment and learned that it was his father’s debt. He also indicated that he 
submitted a dispute concerning this debt to the credit reporting agencies.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-38; GE 2. Applicant testified that he was issued a letter of reprimand from his employer a 
couple of months before he was laid off. He was not laid off due to the incident that resulted in the letter of 
reprimand. See Tr. 34-35.  
5 Tr. 29-31, 38-39; GE 2. 
6 Tr. 39-45; GE 2. 
7 Tr. 45-47; GE 2, 3, 4; AE A; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
8 Tr. 50-57; GE 2, 3; AE B; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $20,963. This debt was for judgment that was 
entered against Applicant in April 2009 for a loan on a repossessed vehicle. Applicant 
admitted this debt. In December 2013, he entered into an agreement with the creditor to 
make six monthly payments of $2,066. In his Answer to the SOR, he provided 
documentation showing he made five of those payments from January to April 2014. At 
the hearing, he provided a court document showing this debt was satisfied.9 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – past-due account for $378 with an outstanding balance of $13,827. 
This debt was for student loans. Applicant denied this debt. He claimed that his student 
loans were transferred to another creditor. His credit reports confirm that transfer. He 
provided documents showing that he is current on his student loans.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – charged-off account for $12,393. This debt was for a vehicle loan 
that had a date of last activity of March 2007. Applicant admitted this debt. He stated 
that the creditor would not enter into a repayment agreement due to the age of the debt. 
In his Answer to the SOR, he provided proof that he paid $400 to the creditor in May 
2014 and stated that he will continue to make monthly payments of $100 until the debt 
is resolved. He did not provide proof of any additional payments at the hearing. He 
testified that, after paying off the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, this debt was next on his list to 
begin paying.11 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h – collection accounts for $276, $444, and $116, 
respectively. Applicant admitted these medical debts that are being handled by the 
same creditor. The creditor advised him that it was not authorized to enter into a 
repayment agreement in the state of Applicant’s residence. From January to July 2014, 
Applicant has been making monthly payments of $100 towards these debts. He testified 
that these debts will be paid in October or November of this year.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i and i.j – collection accounts for $422 and $242, respectively. 
Applicant admitted these medical debts that are being handled by the same creditor. In 
December 2013, Applicant entered into an agreement with the creditor to make monthly 
payments of $75 until these debts were paid. He provided documentation showing that 
he made $75 payments from January to July 2014.  He testified that these debts will be 
paid in October or November of this year.13 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 47-48; GE 2, 3; AE C; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
10 Tr. 57-59; GE 2, 3, 4; AE D; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
11 Tr. 48-50; GE 2, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
12 Tr. 40-45; GE 2, 3, 4; AE E; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
13 Tr. 40-45; GE 2, 3, 4; AE F; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – collection account for $650. Applicant denied this debt and claimed 
he paid it. He provided a bank record showing two payments made in December 2013 
and January 2014, totaling $664. Although it could not be confirmed from the bank 
record that those payments were for this debt, no reason exists to doubt his claim of 
payment. I found Applicant to be a credible witness. Of note, the credit reports in the 
record reflected that he only owed this creditor $53.14 
 
Applicant’s annual salary is about $115,000. On December 17, 2013, Applicant 
prepared a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected his and his wife’s total net 
monthly income was $8,873, their total monthly expenses were $4,460, and their total 
monthly debt payments were $3,843, which left them a net monthly remainder of $570. 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated that he and his wife had about $950 in a checking 
account and she had about $6,000 in a 401(k) account. He testified that, other than the 
debts alleged in the SOR, he has been current on all of his financial obligations since 
2011. He has consulted with a company to assist him in resolving his financial 
problems. The company has assisted him in disputing some purported debts.15 
 
Applicant submitted letters of reference that indicated he was a valued employee. 
The letters reflected that Applicant exhibited good moral character and that he is reliable 
and trustworthy.16 
 
Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) In a memorandum dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) indicated that trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply the procedures contained in the Directive before making a 
determination. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
                                                          
14 GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
15 Tr. 58-71. 
16 Tr. 60-61; AE G.  
 
6 
 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable to satisfy for an 
extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 After being laid off from a job, Applicant was unemployed from January to March 
2011. His wife experienced periods of unemployment due to her medical problems. 
Applicant provides support to his parents because his father is unemployed due to 
health problems. Applicant’s, his wife’s, and his father’s unemployment were conditions 
beyond Applicant’s control that contributed to his financial problems. For AG ¶ 20(b) to 
fully apply, an applicant must act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant and 
his wife have been employed for the last three years. Most of the action Applicant has 
taken to resolve the alleged debts occurred since December 2013. Because it is unclear 
from the record whether Applicant could have taken action earlier to resolve the debts, 
he receives only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b).      
 
 Since December 2013, Applicant has taken significant steps to resolve his 
financial problems. He paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.k and instituted repayment 
plans for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. He is current on his student 
loans (SOR ¶ 1.d) and indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is next on his list to pay. He is 
currently living within his means and has not incurred any new delinquent debts since 
obtaining his current job. He has consulted with a company to help him resolve his 
financial problems. He has shown that his financial problems are being resolved, are 
 
8 
 
 
under control, and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(a) 
partially applies.  
 
 Applicant submitted sufficient information to dispute the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 
20(e) applies to that debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a trustworthiness determination by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must be an 
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and 
the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served honorably in the Navy. He is a valued employee and a 
responsible son, husband, and parent. He has taken sufficient action to bring his 
financial problems under control. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For 
all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
under financial considerations guideline.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the SOR allegations:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    WITHDRAWN 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   Withdrawn 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of trust. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
