 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11005 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency, from around June 1974 
to January 2012. He purchased and used marijuana while possessing a security 
clearance from about March 2009 to January 2012. He violated the trust placed in him 
by the Government. His criminal behavior raises serious questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, willingness to comply with the law and follow regulations, 
and his ability to protect classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 4, 2012. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) on May 13, 2014.1 Applicant 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 14, 
2014, was mailed to him on July 24, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on July 29, 
2014. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material in extenuation and mitigation. His undated one-page response to the FORM 
was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on August 26, 
2014, and was made part of the record. The case was assigned to me on September 
10, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, including his June 2012 SCA, his answers to the SOR, and his 
response to the FORM, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old systems support engineer working for a government 
contractor. He married his wife in January 1978, and they have two adult children. A 
third child passed away unexpectedly in February 2009. 
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from April 1978 to March 
1985. While in the service, he tested positive for marijuana during a urinalysis screening 
test for illegal drugs. He was reprimanded for his illegal use of marijuana, and 
participated on a drug abuse rehabilitation program. Applicant was administratively 
discharged for misconduct, and issued a general discharge under honorable conditions 
in March 1985.  
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in 1985, and submitted a security 
clearance application. As part of the background investigation, on April 3, 1986, 
Applicant provided a statement to a government investigator. He told the investigator 
that he illegally used marijuana from 1975 until July 1976. He stopped using marijuana 
when he started dating his wife because she did not like him using marijuana. Applicant 
averred that although he had associated with individuals who used marijuana, he had 
not used marijuana since July 1976. He claimed that he did not illegally use marijuana 
prior to his 1985 urinalysis test. He claimed that he was in a very small room with 
people that were smoking marijuana, and that he ingested the marijuana through 
passive inhalation.  
 
Applicant told the investigator that he thought too much of his family, job, and 
personal health to get involved with drugs again. He stated that he had no intention of 
using marijuana or any other illegal drugs in the future. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
June 4, 2012. In response to Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed that he started illegally using marijuana in June 1974, and that he 
first purchased marijuana in October 1975. Applicant further disclosed that after the 
death of his youngest son in February 2009, he illegally used marijuana two to three 
times per week to help him sleep and cope with the death of his son. He purchased 
marijuana from a close friend and a family member every three to four months. He 
claimed he last used marijuana in January 2012. A family doctor prescribed him 
medication to help him sleep in March 2012. He has not participated in any recent 
substance abuse counseling or treatment. In his 2012 SCA, Applicant stated that he has 
possessed a security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI) since June 2001. He illegally used marijuana from March 2009 to January 2012, 
while possessing a security clearance.  
 
On about February 9, 2012, during the scheduling of his upcoming lifestyle 
polygraph-assisted interview, Applicant reported to his personnel security manager that 
he “had used marijuana on a few occasions following the death of his son in February 
2009.” Applicant explained that the death of his son had taken a tremendous toll on him 
and his family, and to cope with the tragedy he “had on occasion smoked marijuana 
over a period of approximately one month immediately preceding [his son’s] death.”  
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in August 2012. During 
that interview, he confirmed that he used marijuana while possessing a security 
clearance. He stated that from approximately March 2009 to January 2012, he smoked 
one joint of marijuana once or twice a week when he could not sleep, and during the 
holidays when his grief would get the best of him. Applicant stated that he was given the 
marijuana by friends and family members, and claimed he purchased marijuana only 
once or twice from friends. According to the interview report, Applicant refused to 
disclose the name of his marijuana suppliers. 
 
During the interview, Applicant acknowledged knowing that the use of marijuana 
was illegal, and that it could result in him losing his security clearance. However, 
Applicant felt this was his best coping mechanism. Applicant denied seeking any type of 
counseling, including grief counseling. He requested, and his doctor prescribed, a 
sleeping aid medication in January 2012. 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant noted that he disclosed to his personnel 
security manager, and in his 2012 SCA, his illegal use of marijuana because he wanted 
to “clear the air and show that [he] was being totally truthful” about himself. He felt it was 
the right thing to do because he considers himself to be an honest and truthful person. 
Applicant averred that he decided not to illegally use marijuana in the future because of 
his family, his age, and his well being. He does not need the stress associated with 
using marijuana. He hopes to retire from his job in six to seven years and would like to 
put this incident behind. Applicant admitted that his illegal use of marijuana was wrong, 
and he should have sought professional help to handle his grief and depression. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
5 
 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana on and off, with varying frequency, from around 
June 1974 to January 2012. He purchased and used marijuana while possessing a 
security clearance from about March 2009 to January 2012.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence. 
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s most recent 
illegal drug-related behavior occurred in January 2012, shortly before submitting his 
2012 SCA. Considering the record as a whole, I find his drug-related behavior is recent. 
Applicant claimed that his marijuana use was infrequent, and that he only consumed 
small amounts of marijuana to cope with his grief. Nevertheless, he has illegally used 
marijuana recurrently from 1974 to January 2012. 
 
Because of his age, his service experience, and his experience working for a 
government contractor and possessing a security clearance, Applicant knew of the 
adverse legal and security clearance consequences he would face as a result of his 
illegal use of marijuana. Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana is a violation of the trust 
placed in him by the Government. It demonstrates a lack of judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and an unwillingness to comply with the law and follow regulations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant promised to never use illegal drugs in the future; however, his promise 
holds little weight. In 1985, he was reprimanded and administratively discharged from 
the Air Force for misconduct (illegal use of marijuana). He was issued a general 
discharge. During a subsequent background interview in 1985, he promised to never 
use marijuana or any illegal drugs ever again. He violated that promise.  
 
Applicant was aware of the criminal prohibition against the illegal use of drugs, 
and of the adverse consequences to his ability to hold a security clearance if he illegally 
used drugs. That did not stop him from purchasing and using marijuana from March 
2009 to January 2012 while possessing a security clearance.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a competent and valuable systems support engineer working for a 
government contractor since 1985. According to his statements, he has possessed 
access to classified information at the top secret level with access to SCI during the last 
13 years.  
 
 Notwithstanding his personal qualifications and past contributions to the 
Government, Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana from March 2009 until at least January 
2012 violated the trust placed on him by the Government. His criminal behavior while 
possessing a security clearance raises serious questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, ability to comply with the law, and his ability to protect 
classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
