 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 13-01130 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a federal contractor seeking to re-establish his eligibility for access to 
classified information, which was initially denied or revoked for financial issues in 2004. 
Subsequently, he defaulted on his mortgage loans, his home was foreclosed, and he 
incurred a substantial mortgage-related debt. He took no action to address this 
substantial debt until recently. Instead, he used his disposable income for frivolous 
purchases and leisure travel. Applicant failed to establish true financial reform and to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2013, Applicant’s request for access to classified information was 
denied by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeal. After the required one-year 
waiting period, Applicant submitted a request for reconsideration. Applicant claimed in 
his reconsideration request that he was resolving his delinquent debts and was now 
managing his finances in a responsible fashion. Based on these assertions and 
documents submitted regarding the repayment of other debt, Applicant’s request for 
reconsideration was accepted by the Department of Defense (DOD).  
 
 
2 
 
On April 4, 2014, in accordance with Executive Order (E.O.) 10865 and DOD 
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which alleges the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on 
the written record (Answer). 
 
 On June 30, 2014, Department Counsel forwarded to Applicant the matters it 
would be submitting to the administrative judge. The Government’s proposed findings of 
fact, argument, and nine documentary exhibits are contained in Department Counsel’s 
file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant submitted a response to the FORM and 
reaffirmed his decision to have a decision regarding his clearance eligibility based solely 
on the written record (Response).1  
 
 On September 4, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case and provided him the 
opportunity to submit additional matters in support of his case, to include updated 
information regarding his efforts to resolve the delinquent debt for over $70,000 alleged 
in the SOR.2 The record remained open for this purpose until September 12, 2014. 
Applicant elected not to submit any additional matters for consideration.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, and making only those 
reasonable inferences therefrom, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, who is in his fifties, is married and has six children. He served in the 
U.S. military from 1983 to 1996 before being honorably discharged. From 2006 to 2008 
he pursued and earned an associate’s degree, a bachelor’s degree, and a master’s 
degree. From 1996 to the present, he has been employed as a federal contractor. He 
has been with his current employer since about July 2013. 
 
Applicant’s financial trouble dates back to 2004, when his access to classified 
information was initially denied or revoked because of adverse financial issues. 
Applicant states that his financial trouble at the time was caused by a recent divorce 
and his own financial irresponsibility.3 Around the same time, Applicant purchased a 
home that he later acknowledged he could not afford.4 
 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 8, without objection, were admitted into evidence. I have considered 
Applicant’s comments regarding the inaccuracies reflected in Gx. 9 in determining the weight, if any, to 
afford the exhibit. See Response at 3. Applicant’s objections to the Government’s proposed findings of 
fact are overruled. Id. at 1. The facts that are relevant to a determination of Applicant’s security eligibility 
and the security-significant inferences to be drawn therefrom, if any, are set forth in the Decision. 
 
2 See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, which has been included and made a part of the record. 
 
3 Gx. 5 at 38-40; Gx. 7 at 2. The parties presented limited information regarding this initial adverse 
clearance determination. 
 
4 Answer at 1. 
 
3 
 
In early 2009, Applicant was working for his former employer and living in State 
A. The Government contract(s) Applicant was working on changed to require a security 
clearance. Unable to secure a clearance and wanting to live closer to his extended 
family living in State B, Applicant secured a federal contracting job in State B that did 
not require a security clearance.  
 
In the summer of 2009, Applicant left his former job and moved to State B. He 
was unable to afford the expenses associated with the maintenance and upkeep of his 
former home in State A. Applicant states that he was unable to sell his former home to 
repay the amount owed on his first and second mortgages because the local housing 
market had collapsed, significantly depressing his home’s resale value.  
 
Applicant’s former home was eventually foreclosed upon, which resolved the first 
mortgage on the property. Applicant, in his reapplication request and notarized Answer, 
states that the foreclosure did not relieve him of the debt related to the second 
mortgage.5 He admits owing over $70,000 on this debt.6  
 
In April 2014, as part of his reapplication request, Applicant submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA). In response to multiple questions requiring him to disclose 
any potential adverse financial information, to include questions inquiring about any 
potential foreclosures or defaults in the past seven years and whether he was currently 
delinquent on any debt over 90-days, Applicant answered “no.”7 After receiving the 
FORM, wherein Department Counsel specifically noted this apparent falsification,8 
Applicant for the first time claimed that he “really thought that when the property was 
sold both loans would be dissolved and did not know any differently.”9  
 
Applicant has been living with his in-laws since moving to State B. In his 
reapplication request, Applicant states and provides information of resolving other 
debts, to include rehabilitating his student loan debt. He states that he now pays for 
purchases using cash instead of relying on credit. He notes that this newfound financial 
insight has allowed him to pay cash to acquire a boat and purchase vehicles for his 
children. His SCA reveals that he took a vacation trip to Mexico in 2012.10 
                                                          
5 Answer at 4-5 (“The property was only being appraised at $217,000 . . . The primary loan [with lender X] 
of approximately $271,000 was resolved due to the property being sold. This left the secondary loan / 
debt with [lender Y] for approximately $66,000 not being paid off and is the incident cited [in SOR 1.a].”); 
Gx. 7 at 1 (“The primary loan was resolved due to the property being sold. The secondary loan debt has 
not been paid off . . .”) 
 
6 Answer. See also Gx. 8 at 3 (credit report lists balance owed on debt at over $71,000); Ax. 4, Proposed 
Structured Settlement Agreement (“total unpaid principal balance” is over $100,000).  
 
7 Gx. 5 at 40-42. 
 
8 FORM at 4. 
 
9 Response at 3. Applicant’s apparent falsification of his SCA was not alleged in the SOR and is only 
being considered in assessing his credibility, case in mitigation, and whole-person factors. ISCR Case 
No. 14-00019 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2014) 
 
10 Gx. 5 at 7, 34; Gx. 7. 
 
4 
 
Applicant claims to take full responsibility for failing to address the mortgage-
related debt and making poor financial decisions following the foreclosure of his former 
home in 2009.11 Notwithstanding these claims, Applicant also states in his reapplication 
request that he is fully aware that the negative financial entry regarding the mortgage-
related debt “will be removed from my credit report by 2016.”12  
 
Applicant contacted the creditor for the second mortgage debt a few days before 
submitting his Answer. He orally agreed to a repayment plan to resolve the debt, but 
when he received the written settlement agreement, he disagreed with the total amount 
the creditor claims is due. Applicant promised in his Answer, which he submitted in April 
2014, to continue working with the creditor to resolve the debt.13 He did not submit any 
documentary evidence to substantiate his dispute, or of his subsequent efforts to work 
with the creditor, or of making a payment towards a final resolution of the debt. He did 
submit documentation showing that he had recently paid a $550 debt for a past-due 
homeowner’s association (HOA) fee for his former home in State A. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
                                                          
11 Answer at 5; Gx. 7 at 1 (similar statement) 
 
12 Gx. 7 at 1. 
 
13 Gx. 4 at 2. 
 
5 
 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.14 However, a judge must decide each case based on 
its own merits because there is no per se rule requiring disqualification.15 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.16 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.17 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s ten-year history of financial problems and recent evidence of frivolous 
spending while, at the same time, accumulating and disregarding a substantial amount 
                                                          
14 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
15 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information).  
 
17 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal. Rather, such a decision signifies that the 
applicant has engaged in conduct or has otherwise experienced circumstances that raise questions about 
his or her judgment and reliability.”). 
 
6 
 
of delinquent debt raise the Guideline F concern. The record evidence also establishes 
the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending 
and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The mitigating conditions that are potentially relevant in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to walk away from a mortgage on a home whose value had 
plummeted as a consequence of the recent economic downturn is generally referred to 
now a days as a “strategic default.”18 Although the confluence of external factors and 
conditions that contributed to the recent recession and eventually led many to pursue 
similar unilateral action were circumstances beyond Applicant’s control, his financial 
situation is not wholly due to such external factors. For instance, Applicant’s decision to 
leave his former contracting job and take on the added expense of maintaining two 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 11-08271 (App. Bd. May 30, 2013) (defining term). 
 
 
7 
 
households was, in part, driven by a desire to live closer to his extended family.19 More 
importantly, Applicant failed to establish that he attempted in good faith to resolve his 
mortgage-related debt before and after the foreclosure action. AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply. 
 
 Over the past five years, Applicant has been gainfully employed as a federal 
contractor. During that time, Applicant disregarded the second mortgage debt. Instead 
of addressing this substantial debt, Applicant spent his disposable income on leisure 
travel and purchasing non-essential consumer goods, to include a boat for himself and 
cars for his children. His short-lived attempt to resolve the second mortgage debt after 
the SOR was issued undermines the favorable evidence of repaying other debts. 
Applicant’s belated action to address the second mortgage debt and statement that the 
debt will no longer appear on his credit report in two years, leads me to conclude that 
the recent action he took to resolve the $70,000 debt and satisfy the $550 HOA debt 
were solely motivated by a desire to secure a security clearance.20 Applicant’s 
statement and conduct evidence a lack of true financial reform and indicates that he 
may walk away from other financial obligations in the future, especially once the 
spotlight of the current security clearance review has passed.21 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) 
do not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence of receiving financial or debt counseling. He 
also did not present documentary evidence to substantiate his dispute regarding the 
actual amount owed for the mortgage-related debt.22 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e) do not 
apply. Furthermore, Applicant’s failure to reveal the foreclosure and the delinquent 
$70,000 debt on his SCA, as well as his inconsistent and contradictory statements 
regarding his understanding as to his liability for this debt, raise troubling concerns 
about his credibility, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
 For all the foregoing reasons, I find that none of the mitigating conditions under 
the financial considerations guideline apply. Applicant’s financial situation continues to 
raise questions and doubts about his current judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
                                                          
19 ISCR Case No. 09-08108 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (Favorable clearance decision reversed, in 
part, because applicant’s decision to move and take a lower paying job to benefit his family, though 
laudable, was not a circumstance outside of his control). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 12-02315 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014) (Sustaining denial where applicant’s action to 
remedy his financial situation was brought on by the security clearance process, not true fiscal reform). 
 
21 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (Individual, who had elected to 
strategically default four years earlier, was granted a clearance because he took good-faith steps to avoid 
foreclosure and provided clear evidence of financial reform). 
 
22 Applicant failed to present any evidence that the mortgage debt at issue is uncollectible under state 
law. However, the legal enforceability of the debt is to a large extent irrelevant as to the security concerns 
raised by Applicant’s ten-year history of financial problems and fiscally irresponsible behavior. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 12-02859 (App. Bd. May 16, 2014) (Sustaining denial where applicant had means to pay 
and elected not to address a mortgage-related debt that was potentially unenforceable under state law). 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).23 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s military service 
and years of service as a federal contractor. However, even after his clearance eligibility 
was denied or revoked for financial issues, Applicant continued to manage his personal 
finances in an irresponsible and reckless fashion. He failed to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his financial situation, including that he may handle his security 
obligations and responsibilities in a comparable irresponsible and risky manner. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
23 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
