KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: In evaluating an applicant’s mens rea we consider omissions or false statements in
light of the record evidence as a whole.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-01328.a1
DATE: 09/17/2014
DATE: September 17, 2014
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-01328
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 28, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
2
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 16, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were supported by substantial evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor, having worked in that position since 2012.
He worked for other Defense contractors for ten years before his current employment.  
Applicant contends that, in 2004, a co-worker told him that taxpayers do not have to file their
federal tax returns until three years after the end of the tax year.  He was 27 years old when he
received this advice.  He did not file federal tax returns for tax years 2004 through 2006 until 2008.
His debt for back taxes is about $60,000.   He has worked out a payment plan with the IRS, and
Applicant estimates his tax debt at around $49,000.  He also has state income tax debts for tax years
2008 through 2010.  He has also established a payment plan with the state.  He acknowledges that
his tax debts were due to his immaturity and his failure to check the tax advice he had received.  
Applicant was terminated by a prior Defense contractor in 2007 for failure to pay his
company travel credit card.  He used the card to make business and personal purchases.  He was
undergoing a divorce, and his pay was being garnished for payment of expenses incurred during the
marriage.  He did not make timely payments under his card after having been reimbursed for his
business expenses by his employers.  
Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) inquired if, within the previous seven
years, he had failed to file a tax return.  He answered “no,” which was false, in light of the findings
summarized above.  Applicant stated that he did not understand the question.  He believed that he
did not owe taxes because he was current with his repayment plan.  He disclosed his tax debt during
his clearance interview.  
Applicant has a good reputation for efficiency, attention to detail, frugality with the
taxpayers’ money, and honesty.  His references described him as professional and unselfish, with
“impeccable character and integrity.”  Decision at 5.   
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge characterized Applicant’s testimony as evasive in regard to his belief that he did
not have to file tax returns for three years.  He stated that Applicant’s claim to have been relying on
advice from someone else in delaying filing was not credible.  He stated that Applicant’s reliance
on “clearly erroneous advice” and his failure to verify it reflected poorly on his judgment and
1In his formal findings, the Judge found against Applicant regarding (1) his failure to file state and federal tax
returns, (2) his having been fired for not paying his company credit card, and (3) his deliberate omission from the SCA.
He cleared Applicant of all allegations regarding his tax debts themselves.  SOR ¶¶ 1(a) and (c) each contained two
sentences.  The first sentence under each paragraph alleged failure to file tax returns and the second sentence of each
alleged a tax indebtedness.  The Judge explicitly found in Applicant’s favor for the second sentences of both allegations.
That is, he entered two formal findings for each of these two allegations, clearing him for the tax debts themselves.  He
also cleared Applicant of seven other allegations that pertained to tax debts solely.  Applicant’s brief contains extensive
citations to his evidence of tax debt repayment, challenging a factual finding that he had not begun to repay his taxes
until 2011.  Even if this factual finding is in error, it is more relevant to the allegations for which the Judge entered
favorable formal findings.  To the extent that the challenged finding is relevant to Applicant’s failure to file his returns,
any error is harmless.  
3
reliability.  He stated that, although Applicant knew he owed Federal taxes since 2008, he did not
negotiate a repayment plan until 2011.  He stated that Applicant had presented insufficient evidence
to mitigate the Guideline F concerns arising from his failure to file tax returns and his failure to pay
the debt owed on his company credit card.  
Regarding the Guideline E allegation of falsification of Applicant’s SCA, the Judge noted
that the question at issue is “clear and straightforward,”  Id. at 10.  He stated that, when he
completed the SCA, Applicant was well aware of his failure to file both state and Federal tax returns.
The Judge found that Applicant’s omission was deliberate.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he deliberately omitted his tax derelictions
from his SCA. We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In evaluating an applicant’s mens rea,
we consider his omissions or false statements in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g.,ISCR Case
No. 12-03415 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  In this case, the Judge’s reliance on Applicant’s
knowledge that he had not filed tax returns and the lack of ambiguity in the question support his
finding of deliberate omission.  We find no error in the challenged finding.  Applicant has cited to
no harmful error in the Judge’s material findings of security concern.1  
Applicant cites to evidence that he had submitted in his own behalf, such as his good job
performance and the favorable opinions of his character references.  Applicant’s argument is not
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither
is it sufficient to establish that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  Moreover, we conclude that the Judge’s whole-person analysis
complies with the requirements of the Directive, in that he evaluated Applicant’s conduct as a
totality.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-02859 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2014).   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
4
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
