 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 13-01265 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 18, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is delinquent on six accounts in the amount of $84,404. None of her 
delinquent accounts have been satisfied or otherwise addressed. She has not mitigated 
the Financial Considerations trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
personal information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 1, 2013. (Item 4.) On December 19, 2013, the Department of 
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons 
why the Department of Defense could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a determination of 
trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility for Applicant to hold a Sensitive Systems 
Position (ADP-I/II/III). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on January 22, 2014. (Item 3.) In her 
Answer, she requested a decision without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) to the Applicant on April 1, 2014. The Applicant 
received the FORM on April 18, 2014, and was given 30 days to submit any additional 
information or object to the material submitted by Department Counsel. Applicant 
expressed no objections, and did not submit any information within the time period of 30 
days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 
15, 2014. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Applicant is 28 years old. She is married. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2010. She has worked for her current employer since September 2011. She was 
unemployed from June 2011 to September 2011. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a trustworthiness 
determination because she is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant is alleged to be indebted on six 
accounts in the amount of $84,404. Applicant admitted all of the allegations found in ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.f. (Answer.) 
 
 Credit reports dated March 2014 and August 2013 show each of the debts 
identified on the SOR. Her debts consist of two student loans totaling $82,945 (SOR 
¶¶1.a and 1.b); a $535 debt placed with a collection company (SOR ¶ 1.c); a delinquent 
telecommunications bill for $470 (SOR ¶ 1.d); a medical debt of $294 (SOR ¶ 1.e); and 
a cable bill of $160. These accounts all became delinquent between 2010 and 2013. 
Additionally, her March 2014 credit report reflects two additional delinquent medical 
debts, each for $100, placed for collections after the SOR was issued. (Item 5; Item 6; 
Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant indicated, in her Answer, that she intended to address each of her 
delinquent debts one at a time. However, she included no documentation of payments, 
payment arrangements, or communications with her creditors to support her claim. 
Each of the debts identified in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f are unresolved. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling or other efforts to 
establish financial responsibility. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her 
professional performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record 
with respect to handling sensitive personal information. She submitted no character 
references describing her judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable 
 
3 
 
to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have 
her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness determination, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive personal information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may rely on 
common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the 
world, in making a reasoned decision. 
 
 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to sensitive personal information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to such information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
sensitive personal information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of such 
information. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated six delinquent accounts, in the amount of $84,404. The 
oldest of the SOR-listed debts has been delinquent since 2010. Applicant has not made 
payments on her debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of showing that future delinquencies are unlikely to 
occur and that her financial decisions do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant still has a significant amount of delinquent 
debt. She failed to present sufficient evidence that she is addressing her debts in a 
responsible manner or that she has the means and discipline to resolve them. She 
indicated that she would repay her debts, but she failed to present evidence that she 
has made any payments. Further, her most recent credit report shows she continues to 
incur delinquencies. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant failed to present evidence to show that 
her financial problems were largely beyond her control. A number of her debts were 
incurred after she became fully employed in 2011. Since gaining full-time employment, 
she has done little to address even the smallest of her delinquent debts. Further, to be 
fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant failed to demonstrate a track record of responsibly addressing 
her delinquent accounts. She failed to produce any evidence of payments on her debts. 
I am unable to make a determination that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence that she attended financial counseling. Further, 
there is no indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 An applicant is not required to establish that she has paid off each debt listed in 
the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates that she has established 
a plan to resolve her financial problems and has taken significant actions to implement 
that plan.1 In this case, Applicant has indicated her plan is to resolve her debts through 
payments one at a time. However, Applicant has not documented any steps she has 
taken to implement her plan. She has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to show that she was in the process of formally 
disputing any of her debts or that she successfully disputed any of her debts in the past. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No.07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008.) 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness. Her financial irresponsibility is 
ongoing toward more than $84,400 in delinquent debt, which continues to grow while 
she fails to address it. Her debts did not arise under circumstances that were shown to 
be beyond her control. She offered no evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, 
better judgment, or responsible conduct in other areas of her life. The potential for 
pressure, coercion, and duress remains undiminished. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a determination of 
trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility for Applicant to hold a Sensitive Systems 
Position (ADP-I/II/III). Eligibility for access to sensitive personal information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
