 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00983 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Marques O. Peterson, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problem was primarily caused by his separation and the 
downturn of the financial and real estate markets. He maintained contact with the 
creditor, negotiated a payment agreement, and is current on his payments. There is no 
evidence of any prior or current financial irresponsibility. His financial problem is being 
resolved and under control. Considering the circumstances of this particular case, 
Applicant’s past financial problem does not show he currently lacks judgment, reliability, 
or trustworthiness. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 6, 
2012. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) on April 28, 
2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 20, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014. Applicant 
requested a postponement of his hearing from July 11, 2014, to August 19, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on July 
28, 2014, scheduling a hearing for August 19, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant 
testified, and presented 37 exhibits (AE A through KK). All exhibits, and the documents 
attached to his answer to the SOR, were admitted without objection and made part of 
the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR factual allegation. After a 
thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
married and divorced twice, and he has a 19-year-old daughter attending college. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in information technology (IT) and business in 1986, and 
was awarded a master’s in business administration (IT and business) in 1993.  
 
Applicant has worked for his employer, a not-for-profit corporation doing business 
with the Government, for 28 years. He possessed a secret level security clearance for 
23 years and a top secret clearance during the last five years. Applicant supervises six 
employees. He is responsible for his employer’s information system, finances, human 
resources, security, and library. He is also a program manager. There is no evidence to 
show that Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information. He requires a security clearance to perform his job. Applicant has been 
successful at his job. During the last three years, his performance has been rated 
exceptional.  
 
In 2007, Applicant and his live-in partner (partner) purchased a $1.2 million 
house with the intent to bring their families to live together. His partner had two children 
of her own. They had known each other for approximately 20 years, and they had been 
in a relationship for two to three years. To purchase the house, they put down $150,000 
cash; financed 80 percent on a first mortgage; and used a home equity loan to finance 
the remaining 10 percent of the purchase price.  
 
At the time of the purchase, Applicant’s salary was approximately $115,000, and 
he and his partner had a combined income of around $180,000. The house mortgage 
payment was approximately $6,600, and it required about 70 percent of their combined 
disposable income to make the payments. Applicant testified that their financial situation 
was tight, but they were excited about their new home and being able to live together as 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
a family. Applicant purchased a condominium in 2004 for approximately $425,000. He 
was planning on selling the condominium and using the proceeds to reduce the 
mortgage payments on the house.  
 
About a year after the house purchase, Applicant and his partner started to have 
financial difficulties and began using their credit cards to pay their debts and day-to-day 
living expenses. Applicant incurred a large credit card debt, but by the hearing date he 
had almost paid off all the credit card debt he accumulated. There is no evidence he 
was delinquent on his credit cards or in any other debt except for the mortgage and the 
home equity line of credit. 
 
Around 2008, the financial and housing market conditions changed and Applicant 
was unable to sell the condominium. In 2010, Applicant’s relationship with his partner 
fell apart, and she moved out of the house with her two children. He tried to sell the 
house for its full price, but because of the downturn of the financial market, the house 
did not sell. Applicant sought the assistance of a real estate agent and a financial 
counselor to help him sell the house, and later to negotiate with the bank. Applicant was 
advised to do a short sale of the house. To qualify for the short sale, he was advised to 
miss three mortgage payments. 
 
In October 2010, the bank authorized the short sale of the property for $900,000. 
(AE C) Based on his advisors’ opinions, Applicant had the mistaken belief that the short 
sale would release him of all financial liability for both the first mortgage and the home 
equity line of credit. In about July 2011, seven months after the short sale of the house, 
the bank collection agency initiated efforts to collect $106,000 for the home equity line 
of credit. 
 
After he was notified of the bank’s collection efforts, Applicant retained an 
attorney to help him negotiate with the bank. Applicant’s attorney and the bank went 
through a lengthy period of negotiations. The attorney passed away in 2013, and 
Applicant personally negotiated a payment agreement with the bank in March 2014. 
Applicant and his partner signed a promissory note in which each agreed to pay 
$53,000 to the bank during a 15-year period with no interest accrued. They both have a 
monthly payment of $300. Documentary evidence submitted shows that Applicant and 
his partner have been making timely payments since April 2014. Additionally, in 2014, 
Applicant refinanced his condominium and made an $11,000 down payment towards 
the loan. Although Applicant and his partner are jointly liable for the total debt, his share 
of the debt is only $41,000.  
  
Applicant appears to be in a solid financial situation. His yearly salary is 
approximately $160,000. After paying his monthly debts and living expenses, he has 
$1,500 to $2,000 left over as disposable income. Additionally, Applicant has $70,000 in 
savings accounts; $20,000 in a checking account; a state college payment plan for his 
daughter with $12,000; and a retirement plan with almost $900,000. A review of 
Applicant’s credit reports show that he is living within his financial means. Outside of the 
house mortgage and the home equity line of credit alleged in the SOR, there is no 
 
4 
 
 
evidence of any additional delinquent debts, or of Applicant having any prior financial 
problems. Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
 
Applicant was candid and upfront during the security clearance investigation 
process. He disclosed his financial problems in his 2012 SCA, and was candid and 
forthcoming during a background interview, and at his hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant and his live-in partner purchased a house above their financial means. 
They intended to live in the house with their children. He planned on selling his 
condominium and apply the proceeds to reduce the house mortgage payments. 
Because of the real estate and financial market downturns, he was unable to sell the 
condominium. He and his partner experienced financial problems resulting from the use 
of their credit to pay debts and day-to-day living expenses. After the relationship fell 
apart in 2010, Applicant attempted without success to sell the house. Financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), and (d) apply. 
(AG ¶ 20(b) only has partial applicability because Applicant bought a house above his 
financial means.) Applicant miscalculated his and his partner’s financial resources when 
they bought a house above their financial means. The house was purchased as their 
residence and not for speculative or investment purposes. He intended to reduce the 
house loan by selling his condominium and putting down the proceeds of the sale to 
lower the house mortgage. Because of circumstances beyond his control (the downturn 
of the financial and real estate markets), he was unable to sell the condominium. Later, 
the relationship fell apart and Applicant was not able to sell the house. 
 
 Applicant maintained contact with the creditor and attempted to resolve his 
financial problem with the assistance of a real estate counselor, a financial advisor, and 
a lawyer. He obtained the creditor’s approval for a short sale, and based on the wrong 
advice he received, believed the short sale would release him of all financial liability. 
When the collection process started, Applicant negotiated with the creditor, and 
ultimately secured a payment agreement. He is current in his payments and has the 
financial ability to pay the debt. Additionally, he refinanced his condominium and put 
down about $11,000 toward the payment of the debt. 
 
Applicant appears to be in a solid financial situation. His income is sufficient for 
him to pay his debts and maintain financial responsibility. He is living within his financial 
means. Outside of the house mortgage and the home equity line of credit debt alleged 
in the SOR, there is no evidence of any additional delinquent debts, or of Applicant 
having any prior financial problems.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s financial problems 
occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He demonstrated financial responsibility and 
there are clear indications that the financial problem is being resolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has worked for a Government contractor during 28 years while 
possessing a security clearance. He is considered to be an excellent performer and 
valuable employee. Except for the SOR allegation, there is no other evidence of 
financial problems or any other security concerns.  
 
Applicant demonstrated financial responsibility handling the alleged debt. There 
is no evidence that he currently has a financial problem. He has learned a hard lesson 
and I find that his financial problems are unlikely to recur and do not show he currently 
lacks judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
