 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00157 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas Albin, Esq. 
Christine Huber, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana from high school until December 2003, when he was 
arrested for possession of drug paraphernalia. He committed several minor offenses while 
employed by a defense contractor, but there has been no recurrence in the past three 
years. However, personal conduct concerns are not fully mitigated. He has not accepted 
responsibility for falsifying his initial security clearance application, and he is now attempting 
to discredit previous admissions of marijuana use after age 16. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
 
 
 2 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on May 21, 2014, and he requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. On 
July 23, 2014, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. On August 1, 2014, I scheduled a hearing for August 18, 2014. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Seven Government exhibits (GEs 1-7) were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) 
received on August 26, 2014. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guidelines E and H that Applicant used marijuana 
approximately monthly from high school (1998-2001) until at least December 2003 (SOR 
1.a, 2.a); that he used marijuana while holding a security clearance (SOR 1.b, 2.a); and 
that he was convicted of a December 2003 possession of marijuana charge (SOR 1.e, 
2.a). Also under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified a February 2003 security 
clearance application by responding negatively to whether he had illegally used any 
controlled substance since the age of 16 or in the last seven years (SOR 1.c). The SOR 
further alleges that Applicant was arrested around June 2003 and convicted of domestic-
disorderly conduct and domestic/malicious injury (SOR 1.d); that he was charged with 
driving with a suspended license around February 2006 (SOR 1.f); that he was arrested in 
July 2011 and convicted of sending a lewd text message (SOR 1.g); and that he was 
required to reimburse the state for welfare monies he improperly received (SOR 1.h). 
 
 When he answered the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted that he had used 
marijuana, but only until age 16. He denied any recollection of using marijuana after that 
time. He denied that he used marijuana while holding a security clearance and that he 
deliberately falsified his February 2003 security clearance application. Applicant admitted 
without explanation the charges as alleged in SOR 1.d-1.g. While he admitted that he 
reimbursed funds to the state, it was for child support. He denied that he had received any 
welfare funds. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old high school graduate who works as an outside machinist 
for a defense contractor. He seeks to retain the secret security clearance that he has held 
since April 2003. (GE 1.) 
 
 
 3 
 Applicant attended high school from September 1998 to June 2001. (GE 1; Tr. 20.) 
He used marijuana approximately once a month at parties in high school, starting at age 14 
or 15. (GE 5; Tr. 55.) After he graduated, he worked for a local supermarket from January 
2002 to April 2002, as a stocker at a wine and spirit retailer from April 2002 to June 2002, 
and then as a machine operator for a local textile mill. (GE 2; Tr. 22.) 
 
 In early 2003, Applicant applied to work for his current employer. (Tr. 23.) On 
February 20, 2003, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a security 
clearance application (SF 86). Applicant disclosed no issues of potential security concern, 
responding negatively to question 27:   
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? (GE 2.) 
 
 In March 2003, Applicant began working as an outside machinist, sixth class, for his 
employer. (GE 1; Tr. 21, 23.) In April 2003, he was granted a secret security clearance. 
(GE 1.) 
 
 Around June 2003, Applicant had a physical altercation with a cousin, during which 
Applicant threw a rock that cracked the window of his cousin’s vehicle. The police arrested 
both Applicant and his cousin. Applicant was charged with domestic—disorderly conduct 
and with domestic—vandalism/malicious injury. Applicant pleaded guilty and was ordered 
to pay $500 restitution and to complete 40 hours of domestic violence education. (GEs 1, 
5; Tr. 35-38.) 
 
 Around September 2003, Applicant was selected into a four-year apprenticeship 
program at work and promoted immediately to outside machinist, third class. (Tr. 23-25.) In 
mid-December 2003, Applicant was driving to his then girlfriend’s home early in the 
morning hours after finishing his shift when the police stopped him for an equipment 
violation. The police noticed a jackknife that was longer than could be carried legally. 
During a search of Applicant’s vehicle, the police found a marijuana pipe containing 
marijuana residue. Applicant was arrested for possession of an illegal weapon and drug 
paraphernalia. (GEs 1, 5; Tr. 39-43.) On January 8, 2004, Applicant pleaded nolo 
contendere to misdemeanor possession of marijuana, first offense, and was assessed a 
fine. (GEs 3, 5, 6.) 
 
 Applicant was laid off around late October 2005. He collected unemployment until 
recalled to the apprenticeship program in January 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 31-32.) In February 
2006, Applicant was charged with driving with a suspended license after it was discovered 
during a motor vehicle stop that he had not renewed his driver’s license. He registered his 
vehicle and renewed his license, and the charge was dismissed. (GEs 1, 5, 7; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 
 4 
 Applicant’s apprenticeship program lasted five years instead of the expected four 
years because of a reduction in class hours one year due to the unavailability of 
instructors. (Tr. 24.) He graduated in 2009 as a first-class machinist. (Tr. 24, 27.) 
 
 In June 2009, Applicant and his then cohabitant girlfriend had a son. Around 
September 2009, Applicant purchased his current residence, a 1,500 square foot three-
bedroom ranch that is mortgaged. (GE 1; Tr. 30-31.) Four years after they began living 
together, Applicant and the mother of his son ended their relationship. (Tr. 30.) Around 
June 2011, they began a custody battle in court. (GE 1.) In July 2011, Applicant became 
upset with his son’s mother about whom she allowed around their son, and he sent her a 
text message in which he called her by a pejorative name. She complained to the police, 
and Applicant was charged criminally with sending a lewd text message. Applicant chose 
not to contest the charge because he did not want to lose work hours. He pleaded guilty, 
was fined, and placed on one year of probation. (GEs 1, 5; Tr. 44-46, 63.) Applicant did not 
inform his supervisor or his security officer at work about his misdemeanor conviction 
because he was unaware of any requirement to do so. (Tr. 64.) 
 
 On May 21, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for an update of his security eligibility. 
Applicant responded affirmatively to the police record inquiries concerning any arrests, 
charges, or convictions within the last seven years. He listed the July 2011 lewd text 
message and February 2006 driving while license suspended (mistakenly as driving an 
unregistered vehicle in November 2011). Applicant also reported the 2003 marijuana and 
illegal weapon charges (mistakenly as occurring in January 2003 rather than December 
2003), even though the charges were outside the seven-year scope of the inquiry. 
Applicant listed his 2004 domestic violence offense in response to inquiries of any felony 
charges or any convictions involving domestic violence or a crime of violence against his 
“child, dependent, cohabitant, spouse, former spouse, or someone with whom [he] shares 
a child in common.” Yet he discrepantly indicated that the domestic violence was a 
misdemeanor and did not involve a victim covered by the inquiry. Applicant answered 
negatively to any illegal use of a controlled substance in the last seven years. He checked 
“Yes” in response to “Have you EVER illegally used or otherwise been involved with a drug 
or controlled substance while possessing a security clearance other than previously 
listed?.” He disclosed that it happened one time, when he was “charged with paraphernalia 
charge on 1/2003.” About any financial delinquencies, Applicant indicated that he had 
missed three child support payments
1
 totaling about $500, but he was “making $187.00 
weekly payments” on the debt, which was not yet resolved. Applicant added in validation of 
his affirmative response, “No court involvement—had wage garnishments taken out from 
the State of [name omitted] to pay off this debt.” (GE 1.) 
 
                                                 
1 
Applicant is apparently required to reimburse the state’s welfare department for assistance given his son’s 
mother to watch their son while he works. The rate of reimbursement is $172 a week. He missed three 
payments, so the state garnished his wages at $187 a week to collect the arrearage. (GE 5; Tr. 64-65.) At his 
hearing, Applicant testified that the state deducted an extra $18 from his pay for the arrearage. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 
 5 
 On July 30, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). The investigator took notes and asked Applicant 
questions. (Tr. 66.) When Applicant detailed his arrests, he reportedly admitted to the 
investigator that that the marijuana pipe found in his vehicle in 2003 belonged to him; that 
he started smoking marijuana in high school; that he smoked the drug once a month at 
parties; and that this continued until his arrest. Applicant indicated that he stopped smoking 
after his arrest and that he did not intend to use any illegal drug in the future. Concerning 
his listed debt to the state, Applicant explained that he has to reimburse the state’s welfare 
department $172 a week for funds used by his child’s mother when she watches their son 
for him. He had missed three payments. The first time, he chose to give his son a birthday 
party. The second time, he chose to purchase Christmas presents for his son. The last 
time, he chose to pay for heating oil for his home. Applicant was currently paying the state 
$187 a week, which apparently included something toward the arrearage. (GE 5.) 
 
 DOHA provided Applicant with a copy of the investigator’s report of his July 2013 
interview containing his admission to using marijuana until his 2003 arrest. Applicant was 
advised to read it carefully and to correct any inaccurate information. On March 20, 2014, 
Applicant affirmed that he had read the summary of his interview and found it to be 
accurate. He made no changes. (GE 5.) Applicant was asked by DOHA to address the 
issue of his debt to the state welfare department. He responded as he had during his July 
2013 interview that he had missed three payments because he chose to pay for heating oil, 
and to give his son a birthday party and Christmas gifts. (GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant now denies any marijuana use after age 16. (Answer; Tr. 52.) He claims 
he used marijuana only at high school parties, at a frequency less than once a month, 
between six and eight times total. (Tr. 55-56.) He also denies ownership of the marijuana 
pipe found in his vehicle in December 2003. (Tr. 57.) He asserts that the pipe belonged to 
his then girlfriend from high school because she used his vehicle to commute to work (Tr. 
41-42), but also denies knowing at the time this former girlfriend used marijuana. (Tr. 58-
59.) Concerning his failure to contest the drug charge at a trial, Applicant explained, “I’m 
just a passive person; I’d rather just take it on the chin. I didn’t think it would come back to 
haunt me as it is today.” (Tr. 42.) About his reported July 2013 admission that he had used 
marijuana in high school monthly at parties and that it continued until his arrest, Applicant 
responded that he tried to correct the investigator, but “he just tried to keep leading me in a 
circle. It seemed like he did not want my answer.” (Tr. 70.) About his failure to correct the 
investigator’s report in March 2014, Applicant explained that he “was so worked up” (i.e., 
nervous about losing his security clearance) that he must have overlooked it. (Tr. 70, 73-
74.) 
 
 Despite Applicant’s inconsistent accounts about his past drug use, I accept as 
credible that he intends no future illegal drug involvement. To Applicant’s knowledge, none 
of his family members or his current friends uses marijuana. Within the last two years, he 
was at a concert when other attendees seated near him had illegal drugs. He changed his 
seat from the floor to the balcony to avoid them. (Tr. 80.) 
 
 6 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
 7 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant told an OPM investigator in July 2013 that he used marijuana starting in 
high school, approximately monthly at parties, and his use continued until his arrest in 
January 2003 (SOR 1.a). Available FBI and court records show his arrest was in December 
2003. In March 2014, Applicant affirmed the accuracy of the investigator’s summary of his 
interview, including the details about his marijuana use in 2003. He now denies any illegal 
drug involvement after age 16. 
 
 Several factors tend to substantiate that Applicant used marijuana until his arrest in 
December 2003. He responded affirmatively on his May 2013 e-QIP to whether he had 
ever illegally used or been involved with a drug or controlled substance while possessing a 
security clearance, disclosing the 2003 paraphernalia charge. The inquiry is not limited to 
use, but Applicant also did not indicate that the paraphernalia belonged to someone else. 
Concerning his interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant contests the accuracy of the 
summary only as to his reported drug use. The investigator’s accurate detailing of 
Applicant’s arrest history suggests that the investigator exercised due care in discharging 
his duties. There is no evidence of any motive on the interviewer’s part to fabricate facts 
about Applicant’s drug use, which occurred some ten or more years before the interview. 
Moreover, Applicant made no effort to correct any inaccuracies in the investigator’s report 
about his drug use when he had the opportunity to do so in March 2014. He claims he 
overlooked the information, but it is more likely that he is trying to discredit his previous 
candid admissions of drug abuse, knowing now that the conduct could cause him to lose 
his clearance and potentially the job he needs to support himself and his son. 
 
 It is reasonable to infer that Applicant deliberately falsified his February 2003 SF 86 
(SOR 1.c) because he responded “No” to whether he had illegally used any controlled 
substance “[s]ince the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter.” Applicant 
turned 16 in October 1999. Even if he mistakenly recalled the date of his arrest as January 
2003, he was required to report his drug abuse that occurred after October 1999 on his SF 
86. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) applies: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant’s arrest record includes misdemeanor convictions of domestic disorderly 
conduct and vandalism committed around June 2003 (SOR 1.d), possession of marijuana 
 
 8 
in December 2003 (SOR 1.e), and sending a lewd text message in July 2011 (SOR 1.g), 
none of which were considered serious enough to allege criminal conduct as a basis for 
disqualification. However, they are part of a pattern of poor judgment starting from age 15 
or so when he began using marijuana, to 2012 when he missed some support payments to 
the state. AG ¶ 16(c) under Guideline E applies: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Guideline E provides for mitigation of knowing false statements under AG ¶ 17(a), 
“the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant’s candid disclosures on his 
2013 e-QIP and during his interview about his drug use and drug arrest were voluntary but 
far from prompt. The DOD granted Applicant security clearance eligibility in April 2003 not 
knowing about his then recent drug abuse, and there is no evidence that he corrected the 
record before 2013, so AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) and AG ¶ 17(d) apply to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the 
personal conduct concern. These mitigating conditions provide as follows: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 The personal conduct concerns raised by Applicant’s illegal drug involvement are 
aggravated to the extent that it continued after he was granted his DOD security clearance 
(SOR 1.b), but there has been no recurrence of any illegal drug involvement since his 
arrest in December 2003. Likewise, ten years have passed since the physical altercation 
with his cousin leading to his arrest for domestic disorderly conduct and vandalism. The 
driving with a suspended license charge in February 2006 stemmed from his failure to 
renew his driver’s license, and his unrebutted testimony is that he lacked any criminal 
intent. He explained that the lewd text message was less serious than the charge would 
suggest. Similarly, the evidence does not show that Applicant acted to defraud the state by 
accepting welfare payments to which he was not entitled (SOR 1.h). Rather, he failed to 
make timely reimbursement payments to the state for assistance provided his son’s 
mother. Clearly, one can sympathize with his desire to give his son birthday and Christmas 
 
 9 
gifts, and heating oil is not discretionary. Nonetheless, his choice was intentional, repeated, 
and relatively recent. He was still repaying the state as of his May 2013 e-QIP. However, 
AG ¶ 17(c) applies in that the offense was less serious than it would appear from the 
allegation. Applicant has exhibited some reform that implicates AG ¶ 17(d) as well. The 
total arrearage around $560 was paid through wage attachment, and he has otherwise 
complied with his support obligations. 
 
 Despite the passage of “so much time” since Applicant’s false response to the drug 
inquiry on his February 2003 SF 86, it is difficult to mitigate his falsification under AG ¶ 
17(c) or AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has yet to acknowledge his response to the SF 86 drug 
inquiry was knowingly false. Applicant’s disclosure to the OPM investigator of his past drug 
use is favorable evidence, but it is not a substitute for admitting that he omitted his drug 
use from his SF 86 in 2003. Furthermore, Applicant undercuts his reform by now denying 
any marijuana use after age 16 and any ownership of the marijuana paraphernalia in his 
vehicle in December 2003. Given the irreconcilable differences between his statements to 
the investigator, which in March 2014 he certified as accurate, and his present denials of 
any drug use after high school, it is difficult to conclude that untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. The personal conduct concerns raised by his falsification are 
not fully mitigated. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
2
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant abused marijuana from 
age 14 or 15 until December 2003, when he was arrested for possession of drug 
paraphernalia after a pipe containing marijuana residue was found in his vehicle during a 
routine traffic stop. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
                                                 
2
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 10 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is 
established in that Applicant possessed marijuana when he used it and, as he admitted 
during his subject interview, he owned a marijuana pipe in at least 2003. Evidence also 
supports AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance,” 
because Applicant admitted to the OPM investigator that he continued to smoke marijuana 
until his drug arrest in 2003. Applicant’s arrest, not his defense contractor employment, 
appears to have been the motivation for him to stop using marijuana. It is more likely that 
he inaccurately recalled the date of his arrest (as January 2003) rather than January 2003 
being a firm date of last use. If Applicant stopped his marijuana use in January 2003, then 
AG ¶ 25(g) would not apply. 
 
In any event, there is no evidence of any illegal drug involvement by Applicant after 
December 2003. Applicant’s current suspect credibility on the issue of his last abuse of 
marijuana (e.g., claims no use of marijuana after age 16) raises concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness as discussed under Guideline E, but it is not a 
substitute for record evidence of illegal drug use.
3
 AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” applies. His illegal drug involvement last occurred more than ten years ago. 
 
 During his July 2013 interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant denied any 
illegal drug involvement since his 2003 arrest and any intent to use any illegal drug in the 
future. Under AG 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,” may 
be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant continues to associate with his old high school 
friends with whom he used marijuana at parties. He candidly admitted at his hearing that 
he was at a concert within the past two years where attendees seated near him had illegal 
drugs. He changed his seat from the floor to the balcony to avoid them, so both AG ¶ 
26(b)(1) and AG ¶ 26(b)(2) apply. No recurrence of any drug use or drug arrest in the last 
ten years establishes AG ¶ 26(b)(3), “an appropriate period of abstinence,” especially in 
                                                 
3 
The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that an adverse credibility determination is not a substitute for record 
evidence. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004), in which the Board stated the following: 
 
An unfavorable credibility determination provides a Judge with a basis for deciding to 
disbelieve an applicant's testimony. However, mere disbelief of that testimony, standing 
alone, is not a sufficient basis for a Judge to conclude that the applicant did something (e.g., 
engaged in drug abuse after a given date) for which there is no independent evidence. 
 
 11 
light of Applicant’s changed circumstances. Applicant used marijuana when he was 14 or 
15 to age 20, before he became a father and homeowner. While Applicant did not present 
an affirmative statement acknowledging his understanding that his clearance would be 
revoked for any future illegal drug involvement, he clearly understands that any illegal drug 
involvement is incompatible with his defense contractor employment and security 
clearance. Applicant’s efforts to discredit his previous admissions of ongoing marijuana 
involvement through 2003 reflect his desire to protect his employment rather than a failure 
to put his illegal drug use behind him. AG ¶ 26(b) applies in mitigation of the drug 
involvement concerns. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
4
 
 
Applicant’s drug involvement is explained by the immaturity of youth. He committed 
some minor criminal offenses while employed by a defense contractor and while holding a 
security clearance for his duties. Applicant did not allow this pattern of poor judgment off 
the job to affect his work. On his completion of a selective apprenticeship program, he was 
promoted to his present position of outside machinist first class. While his support 
arrearage suggests tight finances, he has owned his home since 2005. Applicant is 
commended for establishing a stable lifestyle in which to raise his young son. The 
importance of his job to him is clear, but it cannot justify or explain the inconsistent 
accounts about his drug involvement that are in the record. Once a security concern arises, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or continuation of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 
(1991). For the reasons stated above, I cannot conclude that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
                                                 
4 
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 12 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.g:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
___________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
