 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00330 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. This action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. March 7, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 
 
2 
 
 
30, 2014, Department Counsel compiled the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) that contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9.  
 
On May 5, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded 
to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any objections or any 
additional matters within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on May 
13, 2014, and did not submit any objections or additional matters within the allotted 
period. The case was assigned to me on September 15, 2014. Items 1 through 9 in the 
FORM are admitted into evidence.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old security officer who works for a defense contractor. He 
has been working for his current employer since April 2011. He retired from the U.S. 
Army after serving on active duty from August 1978 to August 2000 and attaining the 
grade of sergeant first class (E-7). He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007, a master’s 
degree in 2009, and another master’s degree in 2011. He is married and has two adult 
children. He held a security clearance in the Army as a member of the military police.2 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had two delinquent debts totaling $28,176. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation with comments. His admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
 In his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated 
October 18, 2012, Applicant stated that he has operated a part-time real estate 
business since April 2003 and has been working as a real estate broker for that 
business since January 2005. In the e-QIP, he also disclosed that he had two 
delinquent debts, i.e., the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a for over $21,000 and a bank debt for 
$2,247 that he stated was paid in full. He further noted that, when the real estate market 
crashed, he took a financial hit and enrolled with a credit counseling service to resolve 
his financial problems.4 
 
 In the e-QIP, Applicant also indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a resulted in a 
default judgment being entered on April 9, 2010, and, eleven days later, the court 
                                                          
1 In the FORM, Department Counsel discussed Applicant’s interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator on January 4, 2013. However, the summary of the OPM interview was 
not included in the FORM. In the absence of evidence supporting Department Counsel’s comments about 
that interview, those comments are disregarded.  
2 Item 4. In Section 15 of the e-QIP, Applicant indicated that he was not discharged from the 
military, but noted in Section 13A.6 that he was retired. He may not have realized that he was discharged 
when he retired.  
3 Items 1 and 3. 
4 Item 4. A credit report confirmed that the bank debt was satisfied. See Item 5.  
 
3 
 
 
dismissed the case against him. In the comments section of the e-QIP, he stated “[the 
creditor] took me to court as the guarantee” of this debt. In his Answer to the SOR, he 
reiterated the court case against him was dismissed, noted the debt belonged to his real 
estate business, and indicated the debt should be removed from his credit report. He 
also stated that he tried several times to have the creditor remove this debt from his 
credit report, but it refused.5 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b was for a 
credit card that became delinquent when the real estate market crashed. A credit report 
indicated the last reported delinquency on this debt was in November 2012. Applicant 
stated that he tried to get the creditor to add this debt to his debt repayment plan with 
the credit counseling service, but the creditor apparently had already transferred the 
debt to a collection agency. He stated that he contacted the collection agency and 
began making monthly payments of $50 toward this debt. He indicated that he made 
two $50 payments in 2014. He also noted that his working hours in his current job were 
cut, and he was in the process of obtaining another full-time security position.6 
 
 Applicant’s credit report of December 18, 2013, listed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a as a 
charged-off account with a balance of $22,068. It indicated the last payment on that 
account was in February 2010, and contained the following entry, “**Consumer 
statement** Y Item disputed by consumer  This debt is a corporate account consumer is 
not liable per court decision.” The credit report also listed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b as a 
collection account with a balance of $6,108 and indicated the last payment on that 
account was in September 2013.7 
 
 Applicant’s credit report of April 28, 2014, continued to list the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a 
as a charged-off account with a balance of $22,068 and contained no indication the 
debt was disputed. The credit report also continued to list the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b as an 
unpaid collection account with a balance of $6,008.8 
 
 Court records submitted by Department Counsel reflected that a default 
judgment was entered against Applicant’s real estate business for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a 
on April 9, 2010, and that a complaint against Applicant was dismissed on April 20, 
2010. The court record does not indicate the reason why the complaint against 
Applicant was dismissed.9  
                                                          
5 Items 3-8. 
6 Items 3, 5, 6, and 8. 
7 Item 6. 
8 Item 8. 
9 Item 7. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant provided no proof of payments towards the delinquent debts. He also 
provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, the level 
of responsibility of his duties, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. He submitted no character 
references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable 
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his 
case decided without a hearing.10  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
                                                          
10 Items 1-9. 
 
5 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to 
pay over an extended period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. In April 2010, a court entered a default 
judgment against Applicant’s real estate business for this debt and dismissed a 
complaint against him. The court record does not indicate why the complaint against 
Applicant was dismissed. Later, Applicant tried to have the creditor remove this debt 
from his credit reports, but the creditor refused to do so. He disputed the debt with the 
credit reporting agencies, but it remains on his credit report as a delinquent debt. In the 
e-QIP, he indicated the creditor proceeded against him in court as the “guarantee” of 
the debt. From the evidence presented, I cannot find that Applicant has provided 
sufficient documentary proof to substantiate that he has a reasonable basis for disputing 
the legitimacy of this debt. In other words, he failed to provide enough evidence to 
establish that he was not personally liable for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are on-going, significant, and long-standing. Based 
on the evidence presented, I cannot find that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to the crash of the real estate market. 
He also noted that his working hours in his current job have been cut. Those events are 
conditions beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. When exactly 
the real estate market downturn impacted him is unknown. Furthermore, he has not 
 
7 
 
 
established that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances in attempting to 
resolve these debts. His e-QIP indicates that he has been continuously employed since 
at least July 2008. Little is known about his financial situation. The amount of his 
monthly income, expenses, and debt payments are unknown. From the evidence 
presented, I cannot determine whether he could or could not have taken earlier or more 
aggressive steps to resolve these debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
 Applicant has sought the assistance of a credit counseling service to resolve 
some non-alleged debts. He attempted to include the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b in a debt 
repayment plan, but the creditor apparently transferred that debt to a collection agency. 
He stated that he started to make $50 payments to the collection agency. The balances 
of this debt on his credit reports indicated that he made two $50 payments toward that 
debt. This evidence is insufficient to conclude he has made a good-faith effort to repay 
it. No evidence of any payments toward the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was provided. From the 
evidence presented, I cannot find that Applicant’s financial problems are under control 
or are being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has served in the Army for 22 years and retired in the grade of 
sergeant first class. He reported no criminal record, drug involvement, or alcohol-related 
issues on his e-QIP. Nevertheless, his financial problems remain a security concern 
 
8 
 
 
because he has failed to show that he is addressing those debts in a responsible 
manner.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
