1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-01090
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about her ties to Iraq. Clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
In 2008, Applicant applied for and was granted an interim security clearance for
her work in support of the United States Department of State. Due to several changes in
employment in support of both the Department of State and the Department of Defense
(DOD), she has submitted multiple clearance applications through July 2013. Based on
the results of a background investigation initiated by a May 20, 2012 Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), including Applicant’s responses to
  Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 SOR 1.b alleged that Applicant has three brothers in Iraq. However, she disclosed in the EQIP (Gx. 1), during4
her interviews with Government investigators, in her response to DOD interrogatories (Gx. 2), and during her
hearing testimony that she actually has six brothers.
2
interrogatories from Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators,  it could not be1
determined that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.  On April 29, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns about foreign
influence, which is addressed in the adjudicative guidelines  under Guideline B.3
On May 15, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 5, 2014, and I convened a hearing on
September 10, 2014. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 18,
2014. 
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2. Applicant
presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. All exhibits were admitted without objection.
The Government also asked that I take administrative notice of certain facts
germane to the issues presented by the pleadings. I granted that request and admitted,
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, Department Counsel’s four-page memorandum, supported by
five enclosed documents. I also included, as Hx. 2, a written copy of Applicant’s
prepared testimony during her case-in-chief. (Tr. 45)
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s mother (SOR 1.a),
three brothers (SOR 1.b), and two sisters (SOR 1.c) are citizens and residents of Iraq.
Having reviewed the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional
findings of fact.
Applicant was born in Kuwait of Iraqi parents, who had been farming there since
before Kuwait’s independence in 1961. Her family lived in Kuwait until returning to their
tribal province in southwest Iraq when the first Gulf War started in 1991, whereupon
Applicant’s father established the family farm where Applicant’s family now resides. The
farm is in a rural area of southern Iraq near the border with Kuwait. Applicant’s father
died in 2002. His sons, Applicant’s six brothers,  still manage the farm. Applicant’s4
mother is a 64-year-old housewife who is partially paralyzed and losing her eyesight due
to diabetes. Both of Applicant’s sisters are housewives living nearby. One of them,
along with one of Applicant’s brothers, they are their mother’s primary caregivers.
3
Applicant has at least weekly contact with her mother and those two siblings, and she
occasionally has sent money as needed to pay for her mother’s medical expenses. (Gx.
2; Hx. 2; Tr. 41 - 42, 47 - 49, 52 - 54, 68) 
Applicant has not talked to three of her brothers since 1999. Aside from
perfunctory holiday greetings around New Year’s Day, she has no contact with her other
three brothers or her other sister. After finishing high school in 1989, she moved out of
the family home in Kuwait and moved to a home for female college students six hours
away in Baghdad. She has not lived with her family since 1989 and has not seen any of
her relatives since leaving Iraq in 1999. (Gx. 2; Hx. 2; Tr. 52 - 54, 67 - 68)
Between 1989 and 1999, Applicant earned her undergraduate and two post-
graduate degrees in psychology from an Iraqi university. In 1999, she left Iraq for
Yemen, the only country at that time that would grant work or student visas to Iraqis.
From 1999 until 2004, she worked at a Yemeni university as an academic department
head. It was in Yemen that she met and married her husband, an American employed
by the U.S. State Department. They were married in April 2004. A month later, she
immigrated to the United States and began the naturalization process. Applicant
became a U.S. citizen in September 2007. (Gx. 2; Ax. B; Hx. 2; Tr. 55)
When Applicant and her husband first married in 2004, he had a top secret
clearance with eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI).
Before they could be married, her background was vetted to ensure she would not be a
security risk. After she completed a security clearance questionnaire, she was
interviewed by investigators and a background investigation was conducted of her
family ties and other issues pertaining to her Iraqi citizenship. State Department officials
concluded her circumstances did not pose a security risk relative to her husband’s
TS/SCI access. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Hx. 2; Tr. 35 - 36)
After immigrating to the United States, Applicant found work with contractors
supporting the State Department. Also, over the next few years, as she followed her
husband to various postings in the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Applicant worked
as a translator and media analyst in U.S. Embassies, and for contractors supporting
State Department policy initiatives. In 2008, after obtaining U.S. citizenship, she applied
for a security clearance as part of her work in support of the State Department. She was
granted an interim clearance pending completion of a background investigation. In
2007, Applicant was issued a U.S. diplomatic passport that expired in 2012. Her interim
clearance was continued in 2010, when she changed employers and submitted another
security clearance application for work with a defense contractor. In December 2011,
she was hired by another federal contractor and submitted another security clearance
application, thus continuing her interim access to classified information. In May 2012,
she submitted a security clearance application that continued her interim clearance and
initiated the current background investigation on which the SOR in this case was based.
Applicant continued to hold an interim clearance until May 2014, when her clearance
was revoked pending adjudication of the SOR in this case. (Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. C; Hx. 2;
Tr. 36 - 41, 78)
4
Beginning with the pre-marital screening process in 2004, Applicant has
submitted seven security clearance applications. In July 2013, the defense contractor
for whom Applicant now works, sponsored Applicant’s application for TS/SCI access.
The information she disclosed about her family ties in Iraq has been the same in each
application since 2004. Hx. 2; Tr. 71 - 74)
Applicant’s work for the State Department has earned high praise from
ambassadors and other senior U.S. foreign service officials. The senior military officers
and civilians for whom she now works have praised her professionalism, integrity,
discretion, loyalty, and expertise. She has received or been nominated to receive
multiple distinguished awards for her work in support of State Department and DOD
programs. (Ax. A; Ax. B; Ax. C; Tr. 83 - 85)
Applicant and her husband live and work in the United States. All of their financial
assets are here and Applicant has no property interests outside the United States.
Applicant has no ownership interest in her family’s farm in Iraq; she has never voted in
an election there; she has not served in the Iraqi military; she has never received any
benefits from the Iraqi government; and she has no plans to return to Iraq. (Answer; Hx.
2; 62 - 64)
Based on the information Department Counsel submitted in its administrative
notice request (Hx. 1), I make the following findings of fact:
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power
in Iraq. Following the removal of Hussein’s government from power, open elections
were held in January 2005 to elect a national legislature. In October 2005, a new Iraqi
constitution was ratified and another round of elections took place in December 2005,
Iraq’s new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in March 2006.
However, political challenges remain and have inhibited the Iraqi government’s ability to
stabilize the country.
Despite the emergence of a constitutional government, most of the country has
experienced serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. With the withdrawal
of most U.S. military forces, the Iraqi army has proven unreliable and largely incapable
of providing the same level of security and counterinsurgency force required in an
increasingly unstable environment. 
Iraq remains dangerous, volatile, and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are
more peaceful and less susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of
the country are still very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of
the country with explosive devices and mines. Attacks and kidnappings continue to
target U.S. interests as well as well as the Iraqi populous. Even with aggressive
governmental action, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups
can conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. Most
recently, the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), a more violent and
better-funded outgrowth of Al Qaeda in Iraq, poses new security risks from Baghdad
 See Directive. 6.3.5
5
north and west to Syria. Of particular concern is the presence of naturalized U.S.
citizens from the Middle East who are returning to Iraq to fight for ISIL, and the potential
that those same fighters would return to the United States to foment terrorist activity.
Human rights concerns in Iraq include a climate of violence; misappropriation of
official authority by sectarian, criminal, and extremist groups; arbitrary deprivation of life;
disappearances; torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; impunity; poor conditions in pretrial detention and prison facilities; denial of
fair public trials; delays in resolving property restitution claims; immature judicial
institutions lacking capacity; arbitrary arrest and detention; arbitrary interference with
privacy and home; other abuses in internal conflicts; limitations on freedoms of speech,
press, assembly, and association due to sectarianism and extremist threats and
violence; restrictions on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement; large
numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees; lack of protection of
refugees and stateless persons; lack of transparency and widespread, severe
corruption at all levels of government; constraints on international organizations and
non-governmental organizations’ (NGOs) investigations of alleged violations of human
rights; discrimination against women and ethnic minorities; human trafficking;
discrimination and violence against individuals based on sexual orientation; and abusive
labor practices that exploit the poor and minorities.
Applicant’s family does not know what she does for a living. They believe she still
works in academia. Living in a rural community, her mother and siblings are traditional
and very conservative in their views on women’s rights. Her brothers disapprove of the
fact that she left Iraq to pursue higher education. They have effectively shunned her for
marrying an American; not so much because of his citizenship but for the fact that he is
from outside their tribe. (Gx. 2; Hx. 2; Tr. 51, 65 - 66)
Applicant testified the area where her family farm is located relies on mutual
defense by a network of tribes in the area. As a result, the same problems that have
beset areas to the north are rare occurrences in Applicant’s home province to the south.
(Tr. 68 - 71)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Foreign Influence 
The facts established by Department Counsel’s information and by Applicant’s
admissions raise security concerns about Applicant’s ties to Iraq. As stated in AG ¶ 6:
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
7
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
7 disqualifying conditions:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Iraq ostensibly is an ally and receives a great deal of military, economic and
political support from the United States. However, Iraq also is increasingly unstable,
violent, and beset by terrorist activity since the departure of most of the American
military presence there. Certainly, in Baghdad and to the north and west, ISIL is
wreaking havoc through open warfare against Syrian, Iraqi, Kurdish factions in an effort
to establish an Islamic caliphate in the region. Kidnapping of westerners and Iraqis alike
is increasingly commonplace. There is no doubt that ISIL falls within the security
concerns associated with international terrorism. The presence of Applicant’s immediate
mother and siblings in Iraq establishes AG ¶ 7(a).  
By contrast, Applicant’s ties to her mother and siblings may be mitigated based
on information that supports one or more of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons,
groups, or organizations from a foreign country.
8
Available information supports these mitigating conditions. As to AG ¶ 8(a), the
circumstances of Applicant’s mother and siblings are such that they are not likely to be
targeted as a means of coercing Applicant. They are not aware that she might work in a
classified environment. At most, theirs is an attenuated relationship resulting from the
fact that Applicant has not been present in the family structure since 1989, has not seen
any of her relatives since 1999,  and has perfunctory contact with her mother and only
two of her eight siblings. Despite the heightened risk associated with their presence in
southwest Iraq, it is unlikely that they will be subject to the terrorist activity that pervades
the areas  between Baghdad and Syria. Further, the common defense of their home by
a network of tribal militias further lessens the vulnerability of Applicant’s family to
coercion by terrorist entities.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(b) applies based on Applicant’s detachment
from her family since 1989, when she moved away for her education, and since 1999,
the last time she saw any of her family. By definition, Applicant’s relationship to her
mother and siblings is close. However, most of her family has shunned her because she
married outside of their tribe and because she has gone against their conservative
views of the proper role of women in society. Applicant remains in contact with her
mother, and with two siblings only because they are their mother’s caregivers. But
Applicant has established her life in the United States for 10 years through her marriage
to a U.S. citizen and through her prodigious accomplishments on behalf of the U.S.
diplomatic corps and the U.S. military. She has no assets or other interests overseas.
She has never voted in foreign elections or sought benefits from a foreign government. 
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(c) warrants some application because
Applicant has, at all times, disclosed her foreign contacts as required. She submitted
informative clearance applications, first to marry a U.S. citizen who held a TS/SCI
clearance; then on six other occasions in connection with her employment in support of
national interests.
On balance, there is little likelihood that Applicant’s family members in Iraq will be
used to pressure Applicant into compromising sensitive U.S. interests. In the alternative,
the record shows that she can be counted on to report any such activity and to continue
to act in the best interests of the United States. Available information is sufficient to
mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline B. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline B. I have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a uniquely talented woman who
has established a successful permanent life in the United States after leaving her family
in 1989 and her native Iraq in 1999. The body of her professional work is sufficient to
show that her loyalties lie wholly with the interests of the United States. References
from senior diplomats and military officials, along with an unblemished record of
9
safeguarding sensitive information while holding an interim security clearance for six
years, show Applicant can be relied on to act at all times in the best interests of the
United States despite the unlikely event of pressures brought through her foreign
associations. A fair and commonsense assessment of the record as a whole shows that
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by the information about her
foreign contacts.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
