 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00282 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated September 5, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 7, 2014. In a sworn statement, dated April 
22, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared 
to proceed on July 1, 2014. The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2014. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on July 25, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
August 13, 2014. 
 
 During the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 3) and five 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE E) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 21, 2014. I kept the 
record open to enable Applicant to supplement it, but he apparently chose not to take 
advantage of that opportunity. The record closed on August 26, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). He denied the one 
allegation regarding personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). Applicant’s answers and explanations 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for which he has 
worked since September 1981.2 He did not serve with the U.S. military.3 Applicant held 
a secret security clearance since April 1982.4 
  
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1979.5 He was employed part time 
during his junior year and full time (after school and during holidays and weekends) 
during the senior year.6 Applicant married his first wife in August 1984, and divorced her 
in August 1994.7 He married his second wife in December 1999, and separated from 
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10.  
 
3
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12.  
 
4
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 7, 2013), at 6. 
 
5
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 2.  
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
her in November 2010.8 He has no biological children, but did adopt both his first wife’s 
two children, including a handicapped adult daughter, and his second wife’s two 
children.9 
 
Financial Considerations 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2007 or 2008 
when the national economy collapsed. During the housing boom of the 1990s, Applicant 
purchased and subsequently refinanced his residence to consolidate debt and pay off 
some bills. His finances were generally unremarkable until his marriage started to 
deteriorate. At one point he was supporting his first wife’s disabled daughter (and still is 
doing so), as well as the residents of his home: his wife, his wife’s two children, and 
their respective boyfriends and girlfriends.10 When he and his wife separated in 2010, 
he “quit being an open wallet and helping them whenever they needed money,” and 
moved out of the house, leaving them to reside there.11 He moved into his motor home, 
and still resides in it.12  
With the collapsed economy, the value of his residence plummeted and he was 
under water on his mortgage. He attempted to “renegotiate” his mortgage but was 
unable to do so because he was gainfully employed, was still making his monthly 
payments, and could not qualify for the refinance. He then turned his attention to trying 
to sell the residence with a short sale. In late 2011, the short sale was finally approved 
by the mortgage holder of both his first and second mortgage, leaving a deficiency for 
the combined mortgages of about $150,000.13 The mortgage holder waived the 
deficiency and issued Applicant two Forms 1099, thereby increasing Appellant’s income 
for the year, resulting in higher income tax.14 He paid his increased income tax.15  
Applicant had been paying the minimum due on his credit cards for some time 
before the economic collapse, and was using the credit cards to pay an unspecified 
variety of other debts and obligations. At one point, when credit became much more 
difficult to get, lower credit limits were imposed, and Applicant found himself with no 
other accessible funds to pay his bills. As a result, some accounts became delinquent 
and were placed for collection or charged off. During 2011, in an effort to resolve two of 
                                                          
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23-25. 
 
10
 Tr. at 22. 
 
11
 Tr. at 22-23. 
 
12
 Tr. at 22-23. 
 
13
 Tr. at 26-27. 
 
14
 Tr. at 27; GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 19, 2013), 
at 8. 
 
15
 Tr. at 27. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
those delinquent accounts, Applicant applied for a hardship withdrawal from his 401(k) 
retirement account. The application was denied.16 
In 2011, Applicant engaged the professional services of a debt relief services 
company specializing in debt settlement to assist him with the short sale of his house 
and negotiate with several of his creditors. He paid the company an application fee and 
a retainer of $250 or $350.17 Applicant is currently paying child support for his adopted 
disabled adult daughter ($95 or $100 per week) as well as repayments for his 401(k) 
loan.18 He contends that all of his newer accounts are current.19 When afforded the 
opportunity to enter into repayment plans or to furnish a personal financial statement to 
enable me to determine if he has the financial ability to make reasonable payments to 
his delinquent accounts, he failed to do so.20 
The SOR identified four delinquent debts that had been placed for collection or 
charged off, as generally reflected by a September 2013 credit report.21 Those debts 
listed in the SOR and their respective current status, according to the credit report, other 
evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, and Applicant’s comments 
regarding same, are described below. 
There is a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.a.) with a past-due balance of $18,796 
that was placed for collection.22 In October 2013, Applicant advised the investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that he had opened the account 
in an effort to build credit, but was eventually unable to continue making his monthly 
payments due to an unspecified “financial hardship.” He claimed he attempted to settle 
the account but “the creditor was uncooperative and would only settle the account for an 
amount that [Applicant] could not pay.”23 After his debt relief services company 
contacted the creditor, Applicant no longer received collection notices, and assumed 
that the account “was satisfied as part of the bank bailout with short sale.”24 Applicant 
indicated he was unaware that he still owed money on the account, and he stated he 
intended to resolve the account once funds become available.25 He did not furnish an 
anticipated date. In December 2013, the creditor issued Applicant a Form 1099-C, 
                                                          
16
 AE C (Letter, dated June 7, 2011); Tr. at 28-29. 
 
17
 AE D (Letter, dated April 8, 2011); Tr. at 32-33. 
 
18
 Tr. at 31-32, 34. 
 
19
 Tr. at 44, 54. 
 
20
 Tr. at 41-43, 50. 
 
21
 GE 3, supra note 14. 
 
22
 GE 3, supra note 14, at 6. 
 
23
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
24
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
25
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Cancellation of Debt, which indicated $17,673.31 had been discharged.26 The account 
has been resolved.  
There is a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.b.) with an unpaid balance of $16,658 
that was placed for collection and charged off.27 In October 2013, Applicant furnished 
the OPM investigator the same narrative regarding the account described in (SOR ¶ 
1.a.). Applicant had opened the account to build credit; he was unable to continue 
making his monthly payments due to an unspecified financial hardship; he attempted to 
settle the account but the creditor was uncooperative; the creditor would only settle the 
account for an amount that Applicant could not pay; after his debt relief services 
company contacted the creditor, Applicant no longer received collection notices; he 
assumed that the account was satisfied as part of the bank bailout with short sale; he 
was unaware that he still owed money on the account; and he stated he intended to 
resolve the account once funds become available.28  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant added that he was working with his credit 
counselor to settle the debt, and that he had funds available from his 401(k) to do so at 
the beginning of 2014.29 During the hearing, Applicant stated that in 2011, the creditor 
had offered to settle the account for $10,000, but he was unable to pay that amount. He 
subsequently was hoping to get the creditor to accept that amount or a lesser amount.30 
In February 2014, Applicant offered to settle two delinquent credit card debts, including 
this one, for a combined $10,000, but the effort failed.31 Applicant has been unable to 
obtain the anticipated loan from the 401(k) or borrow money from family members.32 He 
has not made any payments to the creditor because his debt relief services company 
advised him not to do so.33 The account has not been resolved. 
There is a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.c.) with an unpaid balance of $12,864 
that was placed for collection and charged off.34 In October 2013, Applicant furnished 
the OPM investigator the same narrative regarding the account described in (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b.). Applicant had opened the account to build credit; he was unable to 
continue making his monthly payments due to an unspecified financial hardship; he 
attempted to settle the account but the creditor was uncooperative; the creditor would 
                                                          
26
 AE A (Form 1099-C, dated December 16, 2013). 
 
27
 GE 3, supra note 14, at 7-8. 
 
28
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
29
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated April 22, 2014. 
 
30
 Tr. at 30. 
 
31
 Tr. at 39. 
 
32
 Tr. at 37-38. 
 
33
 Tr. at 39. 
 
34
 GE 3, supra note 14, at 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
only settle the account for an amount that Applicant could not pay; after his debt relief 
services company contacted the creditor, Applicant no longer received collection 
notices; he assumed that the account was satisfied as part of the bank bailout with short 
sale; he was unaware that he still owed money on the account; and he stated he 
intended to resolve the account once funds become available.35  
In his answer to the SOR, and during the hearing, Applicant described the 
identical efforts (and non-efforts) he referred to above regarding the other two credit 
cards. The account has not been resolved. 
There is a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.d.) with an unpaid balance of $3,604 that 
was placed for collection and charged off.36 In October 2013, Applicant furnished the 
OPM investigator the same narrative regarding the account described in (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.c.). Applicant had opened the account to build credit; he was unable to 
continue making his monthly payments due to an unspecified financial hardship; he 
attempted to settle the account but the creditor was uncooperative; the creditor would 
only settle the account for an amount that Applicant could not pay; after his debt relief 
services company contacted the creditor, Applicant no longer received collection 
notices; he assumed that the account was satisfied as part of the bank bailout with short 
sale; he was unaware that he still owed money on the account; and he stated he 
intended to resolve the account once funds become available.37  
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant added that in February 2014, with the 
assistance of his credit counselor, he settled the debt.38 The account was settled for 
$500.39 The account has been resolved. 
Personal Conduct 
 On September 5, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
certain questions pertaining to his financial record. The questions in Section 26 – 
Financial Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had: bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency; any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for 
failing to pay as agreed, and if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions. He certified that the responses were 
“true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the responses 
to those questions were, in fact, false.  
 
                                                          
35
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
36
 GE 3, supra note 14, at 7. There was a past-due balance of $2,577 and an unpaid balance of $3,604, but 
$3,635 was actually charged off in September 2011. 
 
37
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 8. 
 
38
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 29. 
 
39
 AE B (Letter, dated April 28, 2014). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his responses, and explained 
that he had simply answered the questions very quickly, relying on outdated 
information.40 He claimed he was unaware of the delinquent accounts until they were 
brought to his attention by the OPM investigator.41 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The president of Applicant’s union supports Applicant’s application, and indicated 
that the organization “is proud of his affiliation and holds him in the highest esteem for 
his loyalty, integrity and honesty.”42  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”43 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”44   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                          
40
 Tr. at 47. 
 
41
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 29. 
 
42
 AE E (Character Reference, dated July 30, 2014). 
 
43
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
44
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”45 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.46  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”47 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”48 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
                                                          
45
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
46
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
47
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
48
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Although he encountered some financial difficulties as early as 2007 
or 2008, Applicant’s most significant recent financial problems arose in 2011, and 
continue to the present. He was unable to continue making his routine monthly 
payments, and various accounts became delinquent and were either placed for 
collection or charged off. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.49  
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) minimally apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) do not apply. The 
nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
initially since 2007 or 2008, but reappearing in 2011, make it difficult to conclude that it 
                                                          
49
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” While there is evidence that some of his 
financial difficulties may have been caused by his separation and other unspecified 
financial hardship, without more detailed explanations, it is difficult to assess to what 
degree those financial hardships were beyond Applicant’s control. There are no periods 
of unemployment, and other than the issues with his underwater mortgage, a matter not 
addressed in the SOR, Applicant has not provided any specifics as to the causes of his 
financial difficulties.  
What he did furnish was a generic, not very credible, template of an explanation 
covering all of his creditors: Applicant had opened the account to build credit; he was 
unable to continue making his monthly payments due to an unspecified financial 
hardship; he attempted to settle the account but the creditor was uncooperative; the 
creditor would only settle the account for an amount that Applicant could not pay; after 
his debt relief services company contacted the creditor, Applicant no longer received 
collection notices; he assumed that the account was satisfied as part of the bank bailout 
with short sale; he was unaware that he still owed money on the account; and he stated 
he intended to resolve the account once funds become available. 
While Applicant received guidance and assistance from a debt relief services 
company in establishing the non-SOR short sale and settling one $3,604 debt for $500, 
there is a paucity of evidence that that particular company offered him any financial 
counseling on debt management, budgeting, or repayment plans. Applicant contends 
that all of his newer accounts are current, and that he intends to resolve the remaining 
accounts, something he has repeatedly stated in the past. However, in the absence of a 
personal financial statement or documentary evidence that he has taken more recent 
steps to make small payments or negotiate reasonable repayment plans or settlements, 
an assessment of his intentions and ability to take meaningful action remains difficult.  
Applicant contends he acted responsibly by addressing all of his delinquent 
accounts, and having his debt relief services company work with his creditors.50 But that 
debt relief services company did little on his behalf to resolve his accounts other than 
advising him to make no payments on the remaining delinquent credit cards. Applicant 
seems adamant in not resolving his remaining delinquent debts at face value although 
he had received something of value over the years. When he could not negotiate an 
acceptable reduced settlement amount, he simply ignored his creditors. One creditor 
simply closed an account and issued Applicant a Form 1099-C. There are clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Applicant’s actions 
under the circumstances confronting him, and lingering questions regarding his candor, 
do cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.51 
                                                          
50
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
51
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
11 
                                      
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 As noted above, on September 5, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he 
responded to certain questions pertaining to his financial record. The questions in 
Section 26 – Financial Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had: bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed, and if he was currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions. He certified 
that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and 
belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false.  
 
 Applicant’s responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of 
misunderstanding or simply answering the questions too quickly, relying on outdated 
information. He acknowledged that he had received collection notices from his creditors, 
but once those notices stopped coming, he assumed that his debt relief services 
company had resolved the accounts. While he might possibly assume the accounts had 
been resolved and were no longer over 120 days delinquent, Applicant failed to explain 
why he failed to acknowledge that in the last seven years, he had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency, or any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. He denied the false responses were deliberate or 
an attempt to falsify the material facts. I have considered Applicant’s educational 
background and lengthy professional career in analyzing his actions. Applicant is an 
intelligent, talented, and experienced individual, but his explanations, to be accepted, 
require that a substantial degree of unreasonableness be ignored. If Applicant had 
acknowledged the deliberate nature of his actions and expressed that it was foolish on 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
12 
                                      
 
his part to have falsified his responses and concealed the truth, his actions might have 
been considered aberrant behavior out of character for him. However, Applicant clings 
to his explanation that when he completed the SF 86 he was unaware that his accounts 
were delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off. His position is unreasonable. AG 
¶ 16(a) has been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, 
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.52       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has a 
lengthy professional career with one employer, has possessed a security clearance 
since April 1982 without incident, and appears to have been a good provider for his 
adopted step-children, one of whom is a disabled adult. He settled one delinquent credit 
                                                          
52
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
card account with a balance of $3,604 for $500 in February 2014. Another delinquent 
credit card account with a past-due balance of $18,796 was resolved when the creditor 
issued him a Form 1099-C.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:53 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s meaningful track record is not one of actual debt reduction through payment 
of debts. Of the four delinquent debts listed in the SOR, Applicant is credited with 
resolving one $3,604 debt with a settlement for $500. One debt was resolved, but not 
paid, when the creditor simply issued him a Form 1099-C. Applicant’s actual track 
record is one of stalling and refusing to make payments or enter into reasonable 
settlement arrangements with creditors.  
 
When Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to various financial 
questions and certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best 
of his knowledge, but the responses to the questions were, in fact, false. He denied the 
responses were deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts. Furthermore, when 
subsequently asked for explanations for his answers, he furnished a generic, not very 
credible, template of an explanation covering all of his creditors: Applicant had opened 
the account to build credit; he was unable to continue making his monthly payments due 
to an unspecified financial hardship; he attempted to settle the account but the creditor 
was uncooperative; the creditor would only settle the account for an amount that 
Applicant could not pay; after his debt relief services company contacted the creditor, 
Applicant no longer received collection notices; he assumed that the account was 
                                                          
53
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
14 
                                      
 
satisfied as part of the bank bailout with short sale; he was unaware that he still owed 
money on the account; and he stated he intended to resolve the account once funds 
become available. For Applicant’s explanations to be accepted, it would require that a 
substantial degree of unreasonableness be ignored. Accordingly, I have concluded that 
he deliberately falsified his responses in an attempt to conceal the truth about his 
financial problems. Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct issues. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
