 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00202 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated. The Government requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
24, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 20, 2014. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 29, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.j, 2.a, and 2.b of the SOR. He 
denied ¶¶ 1.k-1.m, 2.c and 2.d of the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He graduated from high school in 1980. He was 
married from 1987 to 1990. He was again married from 1991 to 1999. He has a 22-
year-old son from that marriage.1  
 
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1982 and served until 1986. He smoked 
marijuana before joining the Marine Corps. He smoked marijuana about ten times while 
in the Marine Corps. About two months before he was to complete his enlistment he 
tested positive for illegal use of marijuana. He was administratively separated from the 
Marine Corps with an Other than Honorable Discharge. Applicant stated he held a Top 
Secret security clearance while in the Marine Corps.2  
 
 In 1991, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor criminal damage as well as 
felony driving while intoxicated while his license was suspended or revoked. He was not 
sure why his license was suspended. He stated that he suspected his wife was being 
unfaithful to him, and he got upset and began drinking alcohol. He was at a bar, drank 
too much and left. He was in his vehicle when the police attempted to stop him, and he 
tried to elude them. He hit six or seven lighted construction road signs and a telephone 
pole. His blood alcohol level was .23%. He pled guilty to the charges, and he believes 
whatever jail sentence he received was suspended. He was ordered to attend an 
alcohol education class, which he completed. He was fined and ordered to pay for the 
damages to the property, which he did. He was placed on unsupervised probation.3 
 
 In October 1999, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor failure to comply 
with a court order. Applicant could not recall the specific circumstances of the charge, 
but believed he was required to pay a fine regarding a domestic violence incident. His 
wife had made accusations against him, and he denied them. He stated he intentionally 
did not pay the fine because he disagreed with the court order. He went to jail in 
                                                          
1 Tr. 23. 
 
2 Tr. 9, 23-28. 
 
3 Tr. 34-40. 
 
3 
 
 
October 1999 for 15 days for his failure to pay the fine. He admitted he and his wife 
were regular marijuana users and heavy alcohol users at the time.4  
 
In May 2002, Applicant was again found guilty of failure to comply with a court 
order. Applicant stated this charge was for his continued refusal to pay the court-
ordered fine for the domestic violence charge.5  
 
 In September 2002, Applicant was found guilty of driving while his license was 
suspended/revoked/cancelled. He does not recall all of the specifics of this offense. He 
recalls getting pulled over by the police and being charged with possession of 
marijuana. He was not driving his car, and the charge was later dropped.6  
 
In October 2001, Applicant was charged with misdemeanor assault and intent to 
injure/reckless. In December 2002, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor assault-
intent/reckless/injure. He indicated that he was charged for trying to hit his wife with his 
car. He denied he intentionally tried to hit her. She grabbed hold of his car door when he 
was leaving her residence. He was fined. It is unknown what additional sentence he 
may have received.7 
 
 In February 2004, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor driving with his 
license suspended for failure to appear/failure to produce, failure to use a seat belt, and 
failure to appear (2nd degree). Applicant believed the failure to appear charge was 
related to his failing to pay the fine associated with the December 2002 disposition of 
the assault offense. He refused to pay the fine imposed by the court.8  
 
 In January 2006, Applicant was found guilty of failing to produce evidence of 
financial responsibility and for having an expired registration.9  
 
 In July 2008, Applicant was found guilty of misdemeanor disorderly conduct-
disturbance. Applicant stated he was falsely accused of assault by his girlfriend’s ten-
year-old son. She called the police. He has not yet paid the court-ordered fine.10 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 40-46. 
 
5 Tr. 46-47. 
 
6 Tr. 51-52. 
 
7 Tr. 48-51, 53-54; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 53 57; GE 5. 
 
9 Tr. 57-59. 
 
10 Tr. 59-61. 
 
 
4 
 
 
In March 2009, Applicant was arrested and later found guilty of misdemeanor 
failure to comply with a court order. He believed it was because of his continued refusal 
to pay the fine from 2008. He admitted he was arrested, handcuffed, and went to jail.11  
 
 Applicant explained that his decisions to not pay fines imposed by the court had 
nothing to do with being disrespectful to the court, but he explained he was not going to 
pay for something he did not do.12  
 
On August 25, 2013, Applicant completed a SCA. In response to Section 22, 
which asked if he had been arrested in the past seven years, he responded “No.” 
Applicant failed to disclose his March 2009 arrest. Section 22 also asked in the past 
seven years if he had been charged, convicted, or sentenced of a crime in any court. He 
responded “No.” Applicant failed to disclose his March 2009 charge, conviction and 
sentence.13 
 
Applicant also responded “No” in Section 22 where he was asked if he had ever 
been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. He failed to disclose his July 
1991 felony driving while intoxicated conviction. Although not alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant was arrested in January 2000 for marijuana possession and driving under the 
influence; in June 2002 he was arrested for marijuana possession/use; and in 
December 2004 he was arrested for dangerous drug-possession/use, and drug 
paraphernalia–possession/use.14 Applicant testified he believed he only had to report 
information dating back seven years so he did not list this information. Applicant’s 
testimony was not credible because he did not include the March 2009 offense under 
Section 22, which was within the seven years.15  
 
Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he owes back child support that 
is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a ($10,025) and 2.b ($43,827). He indicated that he is working 
with his ex-wife to resolve the arrearage and has paid $30,000. He testified that he 
decided to stop paying child support because he believed his ex-wife was addicted to 
drugs. He did not pay child support for three years after they divorced. He maintained 
contact with his son. His income tax refunds have been involuntarily withheld to pay his 
delinquent child support. He does not know how much his tax refunds have paid toward 
his delinquent child support. He estimated his annual gross income is approximately 
$20,000. He failed to provide any supporting proof as to the amount he paid on the 
delinquent child support.16  
                                                          
11 Tr. 62. 
 
12 Tr. 63. 
 
13 Tr. 64-71. 
 
14 GE 4, 5. 
 
15 Tr. 21-22, 64-71. 
 
16 Tr. 73-79; Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
Before 2006, Applicant worked a pipeline job, and he stated he made some child 
support payments through garnishment and tax refunds that were withheld. Applicant 
testified that from 2007 to 2010, he was voluntarily unemployed because his girlfriend 
did not want him to work. She was sufficiently wealthy to pay their bills, so Applicant did 
not work and did not pay child support. He indicated that he received unemployment 
benefits. When asked if he was looking for a job, he stated his girlfriend did not want 
him to work, but towards the end of 2010 he began to look for work.17   
 
Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶ 2.c ($771, a medical debt) and ¶ 2.d 
($484, a municipal court debt18). Applicant denied he owed them. They are listed on his 
credit report. During his background investigation he acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.c, but believed it was paid. He intended to contact the creditor and resolve the debt. 
He also believed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was paid. He intended to contact the creditor to 
resolve the debt. At his hearing, Applicant indicated the debts belonged to a different 
person with the same name and he never was in the location where he believed the 
debts were incurred. He did not provide information as to what he has done to remove 
the accounts from his credit report or dispute them.19  
 
Applicant testified he has not used marijuana since about 2002 or 2003. He 
stated he has not consumed alcohol in two years. He attends church and associates 
with a better crowd.20 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
17 Tr. 81-87. 
 
18 SOR ¶ 2.d alleges the amount of the debt is $771. GE 3 lists the amount as $484.  
 
19 Tr. 21; GE 3. 
 
20 Tr. 29-34. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has four delinquent debts that total more than $55,000, the largest two 
being delinquent child support. He decided not to pay his child support for three years. 
Applicant was unwilling and unable to satisfy his debts. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant did not pay his child support for three years. He stated in his answer to 
the SOR that he has repaid almost $30,000 toward the arrearages, but failed to provide 
proof to substantiate his claim. He indicated his income tax refunds are withheld to pay 
the debt. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because he has not resolved any of his 
delinquent debts. I am not convinced that his behavior is unlikely to recur. I find his 
conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
The conditions that caused Applicant’s financial difficulties were not beyond his 
control. He chose not to pay his child support and have it remain delinquent for years. 
He did not work for almost three years because his girlfriend did not want him to, yet he 
collected unemployment benefits. He has not made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
 
8 
 
 
debts. He did not provide any documented information to show what actions he has 
taken to dispute two debts. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(d) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may  not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his SCA his March 2009 arrest and 
charges, and other alcohol and drug-related charges. Applicant has a long history of 
criminal arrests and convictions dating from 1986 to 2009. He was separated from the 
Marine Corps with an Other than Honorable Discharge due to his illegal use of 
marijuana while on active duty. He consciously defied a court order to pay a fine 
because he disagreed with the court’s findings. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 
9 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 
Applicant has a history of breaking the law. Even after he went to court and was 
sentenced, he failed on numerous occasions to comply with the court’s order and 
refused to pay his fine. He admitted his actions were intentional because he did not 
agree with the judge’s findings. Applicant’s offenses are not minor nor were his actions 
infrequent. Although he stated he has changed, it does not negate his long history of 
inappropriate conduct. He did not promptly make a good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions. His omissions are not minor, but rather are serious. There is no evidence to 
suggest that there were unique circumstances surrounding his omissions. His past 
actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the 
above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He has a long history of breaking the law, beginning in 
1986 when he received an Other than Honorable Discharge for using marijuana. He 
repeatedly violated the law and defied the court’s orders when he refused to pay fines. 
He intentionally did not pay his child support. He has not resolved his delinquent debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal conduct and 
financial considerations guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d   Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
