 
1 
 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 14-00632 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the four allegations. He requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). At the August 14, 2014 
hearing, I admitted four exhibits offered by the Government (GE 1-4), and marked 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which 
an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel’s exhibit list as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I took administrative notice 
of an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) document offered by Department Counsel and 
marked it HE II. Applicant offered 12 documents, admitted as AE A-L, and an exhibit list 
marked as HE III. I granted Applicant's request to submit additional documents after the 
hearing. I timely received three documents, which I admitted as AE M through O.2 
DOHA received the transcript on August 25, 2014. The record closed on August 27, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 51 years old, is a high school graduate, and completed a certificate of 
electronic technology from a technical school in 1984. He has held a top secret security 
clearance without incident since 1996. He has worked for the same small defense 
contracting company since 1985 and held several positions including field service 
engineer and service manager. Currently, he is the director of technical services. (GE 
1; AE A, B) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have been married for 27 years. In 2005, they adopted a 
foreign-born child, who was born in 2004. In 2009, they adopted a second foreign-born 
child, who was born in 2005. The second child, who is now nine years old, was 
malnourished at the time of adoption, and had medical problems. The medical and 
neurological issues continue, and Applicant expects his son to require special 
education at school. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 38-41, 48, 786-77)  
 
 Before 2009, Applicant timely filed his federal and state tax returns for 
approximately 25 years. He did not request extensions. However, in 2010, he had 
difficulty with his returns. As an adoptive parent of a foreign-born child, he was entitled 
to a tax credit for the 2009 tax year. To receive the credit, he was required to submit 
certain adoption paperwork. During 2009 and 2010, the two adoption agencies 
involved in his son’s adoption could not agree about the wording of one of the 
documents, and did not produce it. Applicant timely requested an extension to file his 
2009 federal tax return. The extension allowed him six months, until October 2010, to 
file his complete return. (AE A; HE II; Tr. 40-45, 54) 
 
 In August 2010, Applicant's wife was diagnosed with cancer. Over the next few 
years, she underwent surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and later, reconstructive 
surgery. Applicant cared for her and the children, and managed the household. He 
                                                 
2 Applicant offered the first page of his tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and 2013 (AE E, G, I). 
Department Counsel objected that they were incomplete without the signatures at page 2. Applicant 
submitted the second page of each return after the hearing (AE M-O). 
 
 
3 
 
admits that he misplaced papers and documents: “[p]apers all around the house have 
been moved by myself, in trying to keep the house clean and orderly. And it became a 
great challenge to find the papers and the documents that I felt I needed to continue 
with this.” He testified that he was “[o]verwhelmed, and chose to ignore, if you will, or 
put on the super back burner this issue.” (AE A; Tr. 45-50, 59)   
 
 Applicant knew he would receive a refund on his 2009 tax returns, because he 
qualified for the adoption credit of approximately $10,000. In October 2010, he 
contacted the IRS and explained his difficulties stemming from his wife’s illness and 
obtaining the required adoption documents for his 2009 return. He testified the IRS 
representative told him that he should file his returns, but as he did not owe taxes, the 
IRS would not take action if he filed within three years of the original due date of April 
2010; if he filed later than that, he would lose the refund. Applicant testified,  
 
And that's the way I understood the ruling of the IRS representative, 
who advised me that you need to take care of this. But since you're 
getting a refund you have technically up to three years, elsewise, we 
will keep that refund. (Tr. 46)  
 
He also testified, “I was saying to myself that this is my new deadline, 2013.” Applicant 
requested extensions for 2010 through 2012. He knew, from the “rough drafts” he filed 
with the extension requests, that he had overpaid his taxes, did not owe additional tax 
to the federal or state governments, and would be owed a refund each year. He also 
met with representatives of his state’s comptroller’s office, and was informed that the 
state would follow the federal agency’s policy. (Answer; AE A; Tr. 45-49, 53-59, 83-85) 
 
 Applicant prepared his tax return himself, using tax preparation software. As the 
three-year deadline approached, he again worked with the IRS in 2013 to prepare and 
submit his 2009 federal tax return. He spoke with IRS representatives by telephone, 
and also met with them in person. He filed the 2009 return in July 2013, and received a 
$13,668 refund. He mistakenly thought he should not file the subsequent completed 
returns until he had received the previous year’s refund, because each refund would 
affect the following year’s computation. He waited to file the completed 2010 return 
until 2014. He received a refund of $3,823. He subsequently learned from the IRS 
representatives that he did not have to wait, and could submit each return as soon as it 
was completed. He filed the 2011, 2012, and 20133 returns together in 2014. He 
received refunds for each year. Applicant testified he did not seek professional tax-
preparation help. He testified, “And had I engaged the assistance of professionals it 
probably would have worked out a different way.” (Tr. 67) He also testified that he has 
learned from the experience, and that he should:  
 
                                                 
3 Applicant's 2013 return is not at issue because he filed it within the six-month extension period. (AE I) 
 
 
4 
 
[s]eek out counsel or oversight from others who have more experience on 
matters than myself. Don't just make my own judgments, but seek 
information from people to help make a better decision. In doing this by 
myself, I realize that's where my error was. (Tr. 125) 
 
(Answer; GE 3, 4; AE A, C, E, G, I, M-O; Tr. 49, 58-59, 61, 64, 66-67, 71, 125)  
 
 Applicant was also due to receive refunds on his state taxes in each year from 
2009 to 2013. He filed the 2009 state return in April 2013, and received a refund of 
$2,292. He filed the 2010 return in April 2014, and his refund was $2,147. All 2011 
through 2013 returns were filed in August 2014, and he received refunds of 
approximately $1,800 each year. (GE 3, 4; AE D, F, H, J) 
 
 Applicant earns approximately $99,000 gross annual salary. His wife is now 
recovered and works part-time as a physician’s assistant. Applicant's finances are 
stable. His October 2013 credit report shows that, other than two small medical debts, 
all of his accounts are current. The SOR alleges the medical debts, which total $221. 
He testified that he thought the debts had been paid years ago, and was unaware that 
they were delinquent. He provided documentation showing he has paid both debts. 
(GE 2, 3; AE K, L; Tr. 74-78) 
 
 Two witnesses testified for Applicant. Both hold top secret security clearances. 
The vice president for finance and administration testified that she has known Applicant 
for almost 30 years, and knows his wife and children. She noted in her letter, “His 
character as both an individual and an employee is one of the most dependable, moral, 
and honest individuals I have ever known or worked with.” He is sincere and works for 
the best interest of the company and the federal government clients. The president of 
Applicant's company has known him for 29 years. He knew Applicant's father, and 
knows his wife and two sons. He is aware of Applicant's failure to timely file his tax 
returns. However, he testified, “I think that if, had [Applicant] owed the Government 
money this wouldn't have happened. . . I think if [Applicant] owed somebody money it 
would have been taken care of very promptly. That's just the way he is.” He opined that, 
“[I] don't think the Government could ask for a better person, a more trustworthy person, 
a more patriotic person.” (AE B; Tr. 93-110) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, commonsense determination 
based on all available relevant and material information, and consideration of the 
pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions must also reflect 
consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. The 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
5 
 
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a 
conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines are 
followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance 
governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this case, the 
pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration of the 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no 
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of 
persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interest as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the Government.7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . 
 
 Applicant's two small delinquent medical debts, which are now paid, are not 
security-significant. However, he failed to timely file his 2009 through 2012 federal and 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
state income tax returns. The record supports application of the following disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required . . . ; 
 
 The financial considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.  
 
 Applicant's failure to file his returns is not in the distant past. However, it 
occurred during a particularly stressful time in his family’s life. The adoption issues are 
now resolved, and his wife has recovered and is working. It is unlikely that such a 
combination of events will recur. Applicant has followed the IRS’s instructions, filed all 
of his returns, and his current trustworthiness and reliability are not at issue. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies. 
 
 Applicant's problems occurred during the years 2010 through 2012, when his 
family life was chaotic and he was dealing with family difficulties. These circumstances 
include the problems with his son’s adoption documentation, his son’s ongoing medical 
issues, and primarily, his wife’s cancer diagnosis, surgeries, and treatment. These 
circumstances were beyond his control. Applicant acted responsibly by filing extension 
requests, and by keeping in touch with the IRS and the state tax office to determine 
how he should proceed. However, based on the information from the IRS, he 
mistakenly believed he could file within three years because he did not owe taxes. He 
also relied on a faulty understanding of the filing process, and delayed filing the late 
returns because he thought he could not file each year’s return until the previous year’s 
refund was received. Once he realized that he was misinformed, he filed the last three 
returns at the same time. Applicant should have acted more quickly as his family crises 
began to resolve, and receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
7 
 
 Although Applicant paid his legitimate taxes, and had no delinquent taxes at any 
point, he did fail to timely file his tax forms. However, over the past 14 months, he has 
filed each of the returns at issue. He has received all the refunds due for each year. He 
has no outstanding returns, and has brought his tax-filing situation under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) applies. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s family life was disrupted by a series of circumstances, including the 
difficulty related to the foreign adoption, ongoing medical and educational problems 
with his younger son, and his wife’s protracted treatment for a life-threatening illness. 
Applicant demonstrated maturity and character during that time as the family’s sole 
financial support, managing the home, while maintaining his job. For several years 
during his wife’s illness, his life was chaotic, and he filed requests for extensions on his 
federal and state tax returns. He knew from the “rough drafts” he filed with the 
extension requests, that he had overpaid his taxes, and did not owe additional taxes to 
the federal or state governments.  
 
 Applicant has a 25-year history of timeliness in filing his federal and state 
returns. More recently, an aberration occurred when, for a period of three years, 
circumstances interfered with his ability to gather required documentation. Applicant 
should have been more diligent and filed the last several returns timely to receive his 
refunds. However, the evidence indicates no intent to defraud the government, or to 
withhold legitimate tax payments: he did not owe delinquent taxes, and had paid more 
taxes than he owed.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant has demonstrated behavioral change and rehabilitation by filing all 
due returns over the past 14 months. He realizes the errors he made in failing to seek 
professional financial guidance, and has expressed his sincere regret for his failure to 
timely file. He was open and candid during his investigation, and in his testimony. His 
witnesses, who know Applicant and his family for almost 30 years, both attested to his 
honesty and trustworthiness.  
 
 Applicant's stable home life, his employment history supporting a federal 
contractor over the past three decades, his history of timely payment of taxes and filing 
of returns before 2009, and his 15 years of holding a security clearance without 
incident, support a finding of trustworthiness and reliability that outweighs the failure to 
timely file during a difficult three-year period in his life. His tax filings are now current 
and he credibly intends to maintain timely filings in the future. I conclude he will not 
repeat his conduct in the future. 
 
 Overall, the evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s suitability for 
a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by the financial considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
