1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00054
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the clearance concerns generated by his multiple traffic
infractions and his 2012 alcohol-related charge. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case
On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guidelines J, criminal conduct, and E, personal conduct. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as implemented by the DOD
on September 1, 2006.
2
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 29, 2014, admitting all of the allegations
except subparagraph 1.e. He requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to
me on July 23, 2014.
On August 14, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for
September 4, 2014.  At the hearing, I received two Government exhibits marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, in addition to 16 Applicant exhibits, marked as
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through P. Also, I considered the testimony of Applicant and
one character witnesses. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 16, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old married man with two children, ages eight and four. He
has been married for 12 years. Applicant has a high school education and has earned
multiple certifications over the years. Currently, he is working toward his undergraduate
degree.
In 2001, shortly after finishing high school, Applicant joined the U.S. Air Force
where he served on active duty until his honorable discharge in May 2008. (GE 1 at 15)
He worked as a network integration technician. (AE M at 34) His duties included
operating, securing, and monitoring data bank networks.
Applicant’s performance was exceptional. In 2004, he was promoted from network
integration technician (E-4) to master communications system technician (E-5), and was
assigned to the White House Communications Agency, a highly selective tour of duty.
(Answer at 6; AE K) He worked there from 2004 through 2008. His duties included
planning worldwide telecommunications support for the President, Vice President, First
Lady, and the U.S. Secret Service. (AE M at 3) In 2008, Applicant received the Joint
Service Commendation Medal for “exceptionally meritorious service.” (AE F at 2) Among
other things, he tracked and accounted for 1,200 cryptographic assets valued at 4.6
million dollars. On one occasion, he personally coordinated simultaneous video
teleconferencing sessions at five different presidential event locations for the White
House staff during a White House Situation room personnel shortfall. During the 2004
Presidential Campaign, Applicant’s “outstanding technical skills and meticulous attention
to detail enabled 100-percent equipment readiness . . . of the highest operating tempos
in the Agency’s history.” (AE F at 2) Although Applicant was not in a position of authority,
“higher ranking enlisted [personnel] and officers alike [sought him] out several times a
week to get advice . . .” (AE D at 3)
Since leaving the military, Applicant has worked as a telecommunications systems
analyst in support of a federal government agency. Currently, he is a senior team
manager who supervises ten employees. (AE D at 1) According to his supervisor, his
performance is outstanding. (AE D at 1)
On January 12, 2011, Applicant left his home in a rush and forgot his wallet.
Subsequently, he was stopped by police and charged with failure to display his
At some time after the November 2011 traffic stop and the February 9, 2012 DUI sentencing, Applicant’s1
license was suspended related to the DUI charge of October 2011. (Tr. 40)
3
 
automobile registration and failure to display his driver’s license to police on demand. He
pleaded guilty and was ordered to pay a $50 fine. (AE B at 2).
On October 7, 2011, Applicant left home after an argument with his wife and went
to a restaurant where he consumed several alcoholic beverages. Intoxicated, Applicant
backed into another car while leaving the parking lot, and later failed to stop at a red
light.  He was then stopped by police, arrested, and charged with the following:
1) driving vehicle while under the influence of alcohol (DUI);
2) DUI per se;
3) driving while impaired by alcohol;
4) driver failure to stop at a steady circular red signal;
5) negligent driving vehicle in careless and imprudent manner
endangering property, life, and person;
6) failure of vehicle driver to stop after unattended vehicle
damage accident; and
7) failure of driver in accident to locate and notify owner of
unattended vehicle of damage.
On February 9, 2012, he pleaded guilty to counts two and seven, and was given two
years of probation before judgment. Also, the court suspended his license for 90 days,
and ordered him to attend a 16-week substance abuse education class. Applicant
completed the substance abuse education class, as ordered.
On November 24, 2011, while the DUI-related charges were pending, the police
stopped Applicant and charged him with several traffic-related expenses including
speeding, and failure to display registration card upon demand by a police officer. (Tr.
37)  Subsequently, he was fined $572 in penalties and court costs. (AE B at 1)
On February 7, 2012, Applicant’s daughter was at cheerleading practice and his
wife was unable to pick her up when it was over. Applicant knew that his license was
suspended, so he called a family friend to retrieve his daughter. The friend was
unavailable. He then called his daughter’s godparents. They were also unable to retrieve
her. With no other option, Applicant drove to cheerleading practice to get his daughter.
(Tr. 41) Subsequently the police stopped  and charged him with driving a motor vehicle
on a suspended license,  failure to display his driver’s license to a uniformed police1
officer on demand, and failure to display a registration card upon demand by a police
officer. On June 1, 2012, the court determined that the police stopped Applicant’s car
illegally, and nolle prossed the charges. (Tr. 35, 41)
On October 1, 2012, the police stopped Applicant after noticing that one of his
car’s headlights was not working,  and charged him with driving on a suspended license.
According to Applicant, his license was suspended because he had too many points on
Applicant’s mother is single.2
4
 
his driver’s license. (Tr. 47) Also, Applicant contends that he never received notification
that his license had been suspended again. (Tr. 43) In January 2013, Applicant pleaded
guilty and was given probation before judgment, placed on probation for a year, and
ordered to perform 16 hours of community service. (Tr. 44) Since then, Applicant has not
committed any additional criminal or traffic offenses. His probation expired in January
2014. (Tr. 45)
Applicant has held a security clearance for 13 years. (AE N at 1) He contends that
his behavior between 2011 and 2012 was uncharacteristic and was triggered by family
problems including his mother’s ailing health, and his decision to provide financial
support for his teenage brother when his mother  was too sick to capably care for him.2
The extent to which he helped his brother during his mother’s illness was periodically a
source of tension with his wife. Applicant’s brother is now an adult. (Tr. 50-51) 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Moreover, by its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30)
Applicant’s history of traffic offenses triggers the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”
5
 
Applicant’s most serious crime, the DUI offense, occurred nearly three years ago.
He completed alcohol education classes, as ordered, and has committed no alcohol-
related offenses since then. Applicant’s most recent charge, driving with a suspended
license, occurred approximately two years ago. He served his probation, which ended in
January 2014, without incident. Upon considering Applicant’s stellar career trajectory, the
length of time he has held a security clearance, the length of time that has elapsed since
his most recent offense, and the small range of time when these offenses occurred,  I
conclude that Applicant’s criminal conduct was an anomaly. The mitigating conditions set
forth in  AG ¶ 32 are applicable, as follows:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
I conclude Applicant has mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
I concluded that Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns, in
part, because all of the criminal activity except the DUI were minor. However, this does
not end the security clearance analysis. The repeated nature of the traffic offenses raises
questions about Applicant’s judgment and respect for rules and regulations, and raises a
security concern under the personal conduct guideline, as set forth below:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. (AG ¶ 15)
Specifically, the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are applicable:
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or tother
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information; and 
(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.
6
 
Applicant’s misconduct occurred during a twenty-month period over the course of
a 14-year career. With the exception of the DUI, all of it was minor. Applicant attributes
his problems, in part, to being preoccupied with an unusually high amount of family
stress generated over a disagreement with his wife over the amount of care to provide
for his brother, a legal minor, while Applicant’s mother was disabled. Now, Applicant’s
brother is an adult. Although it is not inconceivable that he may again seek assistance
from Applicant in the future, his status as an adult renders it less likely. 
The negative security ramifications of the February 2012 episode of driving
without a suspended license were partially mitigated by the unique nature of the
surrounding circumstances. Nearly two years has elapsed since Applicant’s most recent
infraction. AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The isolated nature of Applicant’s conduct, the surrounding circumstances, and
the amount of time that has elapsed since the most recent episode of misconduct render
the potential for coercion or the likelihood of recurrence minimal. In reaching this
conclusion, I noted that not only did Applicant not have any criminal or personal conduct
issues before 2011; he was a stellar individual who excelled in his career both while in
the Air Force and, later, in the civilian world.
7
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
