KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s unresolved financial problems support the Judge’s adverse conclusions,
despite her good record.  The Board has no authority to grant a trustworthiness designation on a
conditional or probationary basis.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-00700.a1
DATE: 09/24/2014
DATE: September 24, 2014
In Re:
-------------------------------------
 
Applicant for Position of Trust
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-00700
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On April 2, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On July 17, 2014, after considering the record, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  She holds both a bachelor’s and master’s degrees.
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, for student loans, back taxes owed the IRS and her state,
a defaulted timeshare loan, a defaulted car loan, and other delinquent debts.  She attributes her
financial problems to multiple causes.  She purchased a home in 2005, and the payments turned out
to be greater than she could afford.  She eventually lost the house to foreclosure.  Applicant
experienced unemployment when she left a job in order to attend to family members with medical
problems.  She was unemployed from January 2010 until February 2011.  
She has entered into installment agreements to pay her Federal taxes.  Her state placed liens
against her income for her tax debts, and these liens have subsequently been released.  However, as
of the close of the record, she still owed state taxes for tax year 2012.  Applicant offered to make
installment payments in satisfaction of her state tax debt.  She offered to settle a debt resulting from
her timeshare foreclosure as well as the one resulting from the voluntary repossession of her car.
These settlement offers were made in June and July  2014.  She has also paid or settled other SOR
debts, and she has offered to settle two collection debts.  Moreover, she promised to contact the
collection company holding a $5,000 medical debt.  Applicant has attended a 13-week financial
counseling course and obtain additional counseling through another provider.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems raised concerns under Guideline
F.  He found that she had mitigated some of the debts.  However, for others, including the student
loans, the tax debts, the timeshare, the car loan, and the medical debt, he concluded that she had not
demonstrated mitigation.  Though acknowledging that, to a certain extent, her problems may have
resulted from circumstances outside her control, he concluded that she had not demonstrated
responsible action in regard to her debts, nor had she shown that she had made a good-faith effort
to resolve them.  He stated that Applicant’s on-going financial problems continue to cast doubt on
her fitness for a trustworthiness designation.    
Discussion
Applicant cites to evidence that she has paid off some of her debts.  She argues that the Judge
devoted an unreasonable measure of attention to her remaining delinquencies and did not properly
weigh her efforts to resolve her problems.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ADP Case No.
13-00584 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2014).  Neither has Applicant demonstrated that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s
conclusion that Applicant’s delinquencies raised unresolved doubts about her fitness for a
trustworthiness designation was consistent with the record that was before him.  We note, for
example, his findings about the recency of her settlement offers regarding her tax debts, timeshare,
and car loan.  Timing of settlement offers and debt payments is relevant in evaluating an applicant’s
case for mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-00723 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2014). 
Applicant states that she has never misused protected information.  She also states that her
current duties do not require “access to any code for any systems.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  Concerning
the first contention, the Government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles protected
information before it can revoke access.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).  Applicant’s unresolved financial problems support the Judge’s adverse conclusions, despite
her good record.  Even those with good work or disciplinary histories may undergo circumstances
that raise questions about their reliability or judgment.  Regarding the second contention, our
jurisdiction is limited to those issues described in Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  We have no authority to rule
on the extent to which an applicant may or may not actually have access to sensitive information in
the ordinary course of duty.  Applicant requests that we grant her a trustworthiness designation with
the proviso that she be reinvestigated in a year in order to demonstrate resolution of her financial
problems.  We have no authority to grant a trustworthiness designation on a conditional or
probationary basis.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-11792 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2007). 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
