                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01152
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his use of drugs. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
History of Case
On May 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 23, 2014, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on July 22,
2
2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of one exhibit (GE 1). Applicant
relied on two witnesses (including himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on July 31, 2014. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly used marijuana in approximately
September 2010 after being granted a security clearance in August 2003.  No further
details are provided.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant  admitted his isolated use of marijuana in
September 2010 while vacationing in Greece. He expressed understanding that his
actions could call into question his trustworthiness and ability to do his job. He claimed
his actions could not impair his ability to comply with all laws, rules, and regulations and
assured he would not again associate himself with illegal drugs or expose himself to
circumstances that could produce such irresponsible behavior.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old field services engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in January 1990 (GE 1) and served five
years of active duty before his discharge in July 1995. (GE 1; Tr. 33) He earned an
associate of arts degree in June 1997. Applicant married his spouse in November 1997
and has two children from this marriage: ages 13 and 11, respectively. (GE 1; tr. 35)  He
has held a security clearance since August 2003. 
Drug history
Applicant presents with some past drug use history. In high school, he smoked
marijuana on a couple of occasions with classmates, but never became an active user
of the substance. (GE 1; Tr. 33) While on vacation in Greece in September 2010, he
used marijuana on a single occasion with co-workers. (GE 1; Tr. 28-32) He had
consumed a couple of beers at the time and chose to include himself in an isolated
smoking session with two co-workers. He no longer maintains contact with these co-
workers, who are not known to have any contact with his new company. (Tr.  31-32) 
Applicant has strong religious convictions and family ties and has not resumed
drug use of any kind since his isolated use of marijuana in September 2010. (Tr. 28-29,
34)  Except for his isolated use of marijuana in September 2010, he has never used
marijuana or any illegal drugs since high school. (Tr. 32-33, 36-37)
Applicant has never received any drug counseling. (Tr. 34)  He regrets the 2010
incident and acknowledges using “just extreme poor judgment.” (Tr. 28) 
3
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his direct supervisor, who has worked with
Applicant  for over 16 years. (Tr. 23) He finds Applicant to be a very dependable and
trustworthy engineer who cares deeply about the Navy and the Government. (Tr. 23-24)
He knows Applicant to consistently follow Government rules and regulations. (Tr. 25)
          Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as
well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. 
The AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of
the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with
AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
4
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
While on vacation in Greece in September 2010, Applicant used marijuana in one
isolated instance with co-workers. At the time of his use, he held a security clearance
and was aware of DoD policies in force banning the use of illegal drugs. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and DC ¶ 25(g), “any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance.” Judgment concerns exist over
Applicant’s past drug use. He has some recurrent history of marijuana use on a limited
scale and less than four years of demonstrated abstinence.
5
Considering the isolated nature of Applicant’s most recent marijuana use (2010),
enough time has elapsed to facilitate safe predictable judgments that he will not return to
illegal drug use in the foreseeable future.  Pertinent mitigating conditions covered by AG
¶ 24 are available to Applicant. MC ¶ 24(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and
MC ¶ 24(b), “a demonstrated intent not to use any drugs in the future, such as (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, and (3) an appropriate period of
abstinence,” apply to Applicant’s limited and aged use of marijuana.
Prior to his isolated use of marijuana in September 2010, Applicant had not used
marijuana since experimenting with the drug in high school. With so little recurrent
history of marijuana use, and with so much time that has elapsed since his last use in
2010 (i.e., almost four years), it is unlikely that he will resume his use of the substance in
the foreseeable future. 
Applicant is credited with good judgment and reliability by his supervisor who has
worked closely with Applicant for a number of years and no longer has any contact with
the former co-workers he shared marijuana with while vacationing. Safe predictable
judgments, accordingly, can be made about his ability to avoid recurrent drug
involvement. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of his limited use of marijuana and unlikelihood of ever resuming his
use of the substance. He has provided endorsements from his direct supervisor to soften
or mitigate any of the drug and judgment concerns associated with his past use of
marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s own acknowledgment of poor
judgment and disassociation of contacts with the former co-workers with whom he
shared marijuana during a vacation in Greece help to reinforce favorable conclusions
about his overall judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
isolated drug use and judgment lapse, Applicant mitigates security concerns related to
his drug use. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.a of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):         FOR APPLICANT
   
Sub-para. 1.a:          FOR  APPLICANT
6
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
