 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-00336 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brendan M. Lill, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant and his spouse are close to their parents, who are residents and 
citizens of India. He has frequent contact with his parents and usually visits them 
annually. Applicant invested over $300,000 of his personal funds, and his U.S. company 
invested additional funds to construct a building in India. Applicant owns all the stock in 
his U.S. company. Applicant or his U.S. company expects to receive about 2.4 million 
dollars when the building in India is sold, which is about ten times Applicant’s annual 
income in 2013. Although outside activities concerns are mitigated, foreign influence 
security concerns are not fully mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2013, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On April 26, 
2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, 
alleging security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and L (outside 
activities) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
Government, DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On May 15, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On July 1, 2014, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On July 3, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to another administrative judge, and 
on July 17, 2014, the case was transferred to me. On July 22, 2014, DOHA sent notice 
of the hearing, setting the hearing for July 30, 2014. Applicant waived his right to 15 
days of notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. (Tr. 134-135) The hearing was 
held as scheduled. I received the transcript of the hearing on August 7, 2014.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 5 exhibits, and Applicant offered 17 
exhibits. (Tr. 15-24; GE 1-5; AE A-Q) There were no objections, and I admitted them 
into evidence. (Tr. 16, 24; GE 1-5; AE A-Q)  
 
Department Counsel and Applicant requested administrative notice (AN) of facts 
concerning India. (Tr. 8-9; AN Requests) Department Counsel and Applicant provided 
supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts. (AN Requests) There 
were no objections about the accuracy of the AN materials, and I granted Department 
Counsel and Applicant’s requests. (Tr. 9) The AN requests are quoted at pages 5-8, 
infra (some punctuation corrected or omitted). 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g, and 2.a, 
and he provided mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
                                            
1To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 41-year-old information technology (IT) leader, manager, and 
company owner, who seeks a security clearance to facilitate contracts with the DOD. 
(Tr. 6) He was born and educated in India. (Tr. 27) He has a bachelor’s degree in 
computer science engineering. (Tr. 27) In 1996, he came to the United States using a 
nonimmigrant worker visa. (Tr. 27-28) In 2001, he became a U.S. permanent resident, 
and in 2006, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 28) Applicant intends to continue 
to live in the United States, and he intends to retire in the United States. (Tr. 28) He 
uses his U.S. passport for his foreign travel. (Tr. 51) 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in India; she moved to the United States when she 
was 23; and she is a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 121) Applicant’s two children are 11 
and 13 years old. (Tr. 29) They were born, educated, and reside in the United States. 
(Tr. 29)  
 
Applicant’s oldest brother (44 years old) and his sister-in-law are permanent 
residents of the United States. (Tr. 60-62; SOR ¶ 1.f) Their two children are citizens and 
residents of the United States. (Tr. 61) He communicates with his oldest brother about 
once a month. (Tr. 62)   
 
Applicant’s next oldest brother (43 years old) and his sister-in-law are permanent 
residents of the United States. (Tr. 61-62; SOR ¶ 1.f) Their two children are citizens and 
residents of the United States. (Tr. 61-62) He communicates with his next oldest brother 
about once a month. (Tr. 62)  
 
Applicant owns two homes in the United States. (Tr. 46) The current value of his 
residential home is about $725,000, and his equity is about $450,000. (Tr. 49; AE B) 
The mortgage on his rental home is paid off in full. (Tr. 47) He has about $11,000 in his 
U.S. bank account. (Tr. 47; AE D) The cash value of a $1 million life insurance policy is 
$80,000. (Tr. 48; AE E)   
 
Applicant volunteers in support of religious endeavors in his state. (Tr. 42) He 
also volunteers and mentors to assist commercial opportunities and businesses in his 
state. (Tr. 43) He pays his U.S. taxes. (Tr. 46)     
 
Family Connections to India 
 
Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of India; he visits them 
about once a year; and he communicates with them at least twice a month. (Tr. 54-55; 
SOR ¶ 1.a) He contributes up to $500 monthly to support his parents, except for one 
year, he provided $1,500 because his mother was ill. (Tr. 55-56; SOR ¶ 1.d) His father 
is retired, except for his work for the India company, discussed infra, and his mother is a 
homemaker. (Tr. 54-55) Applicant’s mother or father visited him in the United States in 
2008, 2010, and 2013. (Tr. 103) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
(Tr. 59; SOR ¶ 1.c) He communicates with them about once a month, and his spouse 
communicates with them on a weekly basis. (Tr. 59) They are both retired. (Tr. 60) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s younger brother (39 years old) is a citizen and resident of India. (Tr. 
62; SOR ¶ 1.b) He communicates with his younger brother less than once a month. (Tr. 
63)     
 
Applicant has never worked for the Indian government or been involved in Indian 
politics. (Tr. 50) None of his family members have ever worked for the Indian 
government. (Tr. 55) Applicant traveled to India an average of about once a year, and 
he stays two or three weeks for each trip. (Tr. 51) Sometimes his U.S. family 
accompanies him on his visits to India. (Tr. 104) He traveled to India the month before 
his hearing and stayed in India for almost 30 days. (Tr. 51, 92, 119-120) In 2013, he 
surrendered his expired Indian passport to a security officer, who destroyed his Indian 
passport. (Tr. 52-53, 98-99) 
 
Applicant’s Other Financial Connections to India and the United States 
 
In 2001, Applicant started a company in the United States (U.S. company) with 
about 10 employees. (Tr. 29-30) It flourished under the Small Business set aside 
program. (Tr. 33, 37) By 2004, his U.S. company had about 40 employees. (Tr. 30) 
Gradually his U.S. company obtained more and more U.S. state and federal 
government work. (Tr. 30-31) Currently, almost 100 percent of his U.S. company 
contracts are with state governments and DOD. (Tr. 31, 34-35) Last year, his U.S. 
company hired about 40 new employees, and now his U.S. company has about 80 
employees with less than 10 employees working on commercial contracts. (Tr. 31, 35) 
In 2013, Applicant’s U.S. company had gross revenue of about $15 million, cost of 
revenue of about $10 million, and net income of about $1 million. (Tr. 36, 114-115; AE 
P)2 The growth and professionalism of his U.S. company has been so impressive that it 
has garnered publicity from U.S. national publications and awards from a state 
government. (Tr. 38-41; AE F, G, Q) 
 
Applicant currently owns 100 percent of the shares of common stock issued by 
his U.S. company, and he plans to distribute 19 percent of the shares of his U.S. 
company to employees in the future. (Tr. 45, 110; AE A) In 2013, he received wages of 
about $100,000 from his U.S. company, about $100,000 from profits, and about 
$10,000 rental income, as well as use of a corporate vehicle. (Tr. 46, 95, 111-112, 115; 
AE C) His estimated annual income in 2013 was about $210,000. (Tr. 112)  
 
In 2001, Applicant started the company in India (India company). (Tr. 88; SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 2.a) The India company is a privately held corporation. (Tr. 89) It has about 10 
employees and limited operations. (Tr. 32, 64) In 2009, Applicant advertised on the 
Internet that he was the global chief executive officer (CEO) of both the U.S. and India 
companies; however, his role changed after 2009. (Tr. 107-108) Applicant is no longer a 
board member for the India company, and he has divested himself of his India company 
stock. (Tr. 72) Applicant’s parents are the two board members for the India company, 
and his father is the managing director of the India company. (Tr. 89, 90) Applicant’s 
                                            
2 The transcript has errors in the amounts and nomenclature of Applicant’s companies and other 
documents. Applicant’s hearing statement was consistent with the information in AE E, insurance 
information, and AE P, Company Statement of Operations for 2013.  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
U.S. company owns about 95 percent of the India company stock, and Applicant’s 
father owns the remainder. (Tr. 73, 87; AE M) The India company’s contracts pertain to 
internal India work and not to work performed in the United States. (Tr. 64) The India 
company is separate from Applicant’s U.S. company, and the India company will not be 
permitted access to the U.S. company’s classified information. (Tr. 65, 79-80; AE V) 
Applicant does not have any management responsibilities in the India company, and he 
does not receive a salary from the India company. (Tr. 64, 81) He spends about one 
hour a week working on the India company’s issues. (Tr. 109) In 2013, the India 
company had gross revenue of about $500,000, no cost of revenue, and net income of 
about $150,000. (Tr. 36; AE P) He does not personally own any property in India. (Tr. 
53) He had about $10,000 in one bank account and several smaller bank accounts in 
India, and he closed all of his bank accounts in India. (Tr. 57-58; AEs H-K; SOR ¶ 1.e) 
However, he may or may not have a joint bank account with his father in India. (Tr. 94) 
 
In about 2007, the India company started construction of a massive building in 
India. (Tr. 65-66, 70) In about 2010, Applicant loaned the India company about 
$350,000 to complete the building. (Tr. 74-75, 79; AE L) His U.S. company provided 
additional funds to the India company and received stock in return. (Tr. 88-89) In about 
2012, the India company decided to sell the large building that is the India company’s 
primary asset. (Tr. 65-66) The building is currently for sale. (Tr. 85) Only about 15 
percent of the building is occupied. (Tr. 66) Applicant estimated the building was worth 
“nearly 2.5 million plus.” (Tr. 78, 85, 116-117) The current balance owed on the loan is 
about $300,000. (Tr. 79) When the building is sold, Applicant’s personal loan will be 
repaid, and his U.S. company will receive about 95 percent of the sale price after the 
loan is paid. (Tr. 86, 117-118) When he goes to India, he usually stops and looks at the 
India company building. (Tr. 92)  
 
India 
 
India is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 
1.2 billion people. The U.S. and India share common values including the rule of law, 
respect for diversity, and democratic government. The U.S. Department of State 
reported in 2012 that bilateral defense and counterterrorism cooperation between the 
U.S. and India had grown to reach unprecedented levels. In 2009, the U.S. and India 
launched the U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, which is a bilateral forum focused on 
strengthening cooperation between the two countries in several areas, including energy, 
climate change, trade, education, and counterterrorism. The U.S. supports a reformed 
United Nations Security Council that includes India as a permanent member. The U.S. 
is one of India’s largest trade and investment partners. Bilateral trade in goods and 
services between the two countries exceeded $86 billion in 2011. 
 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage identifies India, along with seven other countries, as being involved 
in criminal espionage and U.S. export controls enforcement cases in 2008. An earlier 
version of that report specifically lists India as being among the most active collectors of 
U.S. economic and proprietary information and highlights specific incidents wherein 
India engaged in attempts to acquire export-restricted products.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In its 2009-2011 Report to Congress, the Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Executive noted that sensitive U.S. economic information and 
technology are targeted not only by Chinese and Russian intelligence services, but also 
by dozens of other countries. The Report states that: “Some U.S. allies and partners 
use their broad access to U.S. institutions to acquire sensitive U.S. economic and 
technology information, primarily through aggressive elicitation and other human 
intelligence (HUMINT) tactics. Some of these states have advanced cyber capabilities.  
 
According to the U.S. Department of Justice, there have been numerous, recent 
criminal cases concerning export enforcement, economic espionage, theft of trade 
secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving both the government of 
India and private companies and individuals in India. In January 2013, the former export 
control manager of a Pennsylvania-based company pleaded guilty to the illegal, 
unlicensed export to India and China of over 57 microwave amplifiers, products that 
have military applications. In November 2011, an employee of a Utah-based scientific 
company was charged with stealing company proprietary information for use in India. In 
March 2008, a Minnesota-based company pleaded guilty to submitting false export 
licenses to the Commerce Department in connection with the shipment of nuclear 
testing equipment to an entity in India. In 2008, the Department of Justice brought two 
separate cases against defendants charged with illegally exporting controlled products 
to Indian government entities involved in the development of ballistic missiles, as well as 
space launch vehicles and combat fighter jets. 
 
Other such cases concerning the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India have included: (I) military night vision 
components; (2) vibration amplifiers and cable assemblies, for use in both military and 
civilian aircraft; (3) manufacturing equipment related to improving the accuracy of 
strategic ballistic missiles with nuclear capabilities;” and, multiple cases involving illegal 
export of products presenting what the U.S. Government deemed to be “an 
unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass 
destruction” or related delivery systems. 
 
India and Pakistan have been locked in a tense rivalry since the partition of the 
subcontinent following independence from Great Britain in 1947. The principal source of 
contention has been Kashmir, whose Hindu leadership chose to join India at the time, 
despite a Muslim majority population. India and Pakistan have engaged in three full-
scale wars between 1947 and 1971, and as recently as 1999, a Pakistani military 
intrusion into Indian-held territory nearly led to another full-scale war. The Indian states 
of Jammu & Kashmir remains unstable, and a number of terrorist groups operate there, 
particularly along the Line of Control separating Indian and Pakistani-controlled 
Kashmir. The State Department strongly recommends avoiding travel to the states of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect 
U.S. citizens. Anti-Western terrorist groups, some on the U.S. Government’s list of 
foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India, including Islamist extremist groups 
such as Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami, Harakat ul-Mujahidin, India Mujahideen, Jaish-e-
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Mohammed, and Lashkar-e Tayyiba. India remains subject to violent terrorist attacks 
and continues to be one of the most persistently targeted countries by transnational and 
domestic terrorist groups. Most notably, in late November 2008, terrorists coordinated 
attacks on multiple locations in Mumbai, targeting areas frequented by Westerners and 
killing at least 183 people, 165 or whom were civilians, including 6 Americans. 
Subsequent terrorist attacks in 2012 and 2013 underscore that India remains targeted.  
 
According to the U.S. Department of State’s 2013 Human Rights Report, the 
most significant human rights problems in India were police and security force abuses, 
including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape; widespread corruption at all levels of 
government, leading to denial of justice; and separatist, insurgent, and societal violence. 
Other human rights problems included disappearances, poor prison conditions that 
were frequently life threatening, arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy delays or the 
denial of justice. Rape, domestic violence, dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual 
harassment, and discrimination against women remained serious problems. 
Widespread impunity at all levels of government remained a serious problem. 
Investigations into individual cases and legal punishment for perpetrators occurred, but 
in many cases a lack of accountability due to weak law enforcement, a lack of trained 
police, and an overburdened, under-resourced court system created an atmosphere of 
impunity. 
 
The United States and India share a number of security perspectives, including 
those on China and Asian balance of power calculations, terrorism, Afghanistan, 
maritime issues, and weapons of mass destruction. However, on a practical rather than 
strategic level, considerable differences remain, particularly as to Pakistan and Iran.  
 
India’s relations with Iran have traditionally been positive. While India has 
reluctantly supported some measures against Tehran, it has been careful not to break 
ties, since to do so would increase India’s energy dependence on the Arab Persian Gulf 
states. Since 2008, imports into India from Iran have dropped from 16% to 10% of 
lndia’s total import volume, and pressure from the U.S. has spurred India to plan an 
additional 11% reduction in 2013. India remains firm in protecting its diplomatic and 
trade ties with Iran not only to demonstrate it strategic autonomy, but also to ensure 
diversity in its energy resource providers. India “emphatically supports Tehran’s right to 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy,” though they are “keen to prevent the emergence of 
another nuclear power in the region.” India’s traditionally lenient stance on Iran has 
been a perennial source of friction with the United States. 
 
Concerning Pakistan, U.S. policy and India policy have often been at odds. 
Although the current Indian government has actively engaged in a peace process with 
Pakistan’s government, Indian officials have long maintained that Pakistan’s security 
services, in particular its Inter Services Intelligence agency, are at the heart of the 
region’s and perhaps the world’s problems with Islamic extremism-a perspective that 
places India at odds with the U.S., whose policy has conceived of Pakistan’s security 
institutions as key players in resolving such problems, even as U.S. doubts persist.  
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet Union, and 
Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts.  
 
India has remained reticent to discuss its nuclear security measures or allow 
inspections. India has also refused to accede to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
despite U.S. policy supporting its universality. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant was born and educated in India. His parents, parents-in-law, and 
brother are citizens and residents of India. He has frequent contacts with his parents 
and parents-in-law living in India. He sent money to his parents. 
 
India company owes Applicant about $300,000. Assuming the India-company-
owned building, with an estimated value of about 2.5 million dollars sells, for that 
amount, Applicant should receive repayment of his loan of about $300,000. Applicant’s 
U.S. company should also receive about 95 percent of the 2.2 million dollar remainder, 
or about 2.1 million dollars. Applicant owns all of the stock in his U.S. company, and 
could pay himself the 2.1 million dollars, or he could otherwise use the funds to develop 
his U.S. company. Applicant has “a substantial business, financial, or property interest 
in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the [Applicant] to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” See ISCR 
Case No. 12-00120 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2014) (affirming denial of security clearance 
because of applicant’s connections to India and noting administrative judge’s findings of 
heightened risk in relation to family relationships and property interests of $340,000 in 
India). AG ¶ 7(e) applies.   
 
None of the disqualifying conditions apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f. Applicant 
has limited contacts with his younger brother living in India; he closed the bank account 
in his name in India that had a balance of $10,000 in it; and two of his brothers are living 
in the United States as permanent U.S. residents. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f are 
mitigated. 
 
AG ¶ 7(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant lives with his spouse in the United 
States. His spouse is close to her parents, who are residents and citizens of India. She 
communicates with her parents on a weekly basis.  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of affection and 
obligation to his spouse, and she is close to her parents. “[A]s a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable presumption that a person has 
ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 
01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d). Thus, 
an indirect, but important tie remains between Applicant and his in-laws living in India. 
Indirect influence from Applicant’s in-laws living in India, through Applicant’s spouse to 
Applicant, could result in a security concern.  
 
Applicant’s relationships with residents of India create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
help his spouse and her parents, or his own parents, who are in India. For example, if 
terrorists or government officials in India wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they 
could exert pressure on his in-laws or parents in India. Applicant would then be subject 
to coercion through his relatives and classified information could potentially be 
compromised. 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s possession of close family ties with their family living 
in India, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant or their spouse has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a 
foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally 
ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of India with the United States, places some, but not an 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his and his 
spouse’s relationships with family members living in India do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives in India.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from India 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, his 
spouse, or his relatives living in India, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and India has a problem 
with terrorism. Applicant and his spouse’s relationships with family members living in 
India create a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently 
close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist relatives in India by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant and his spouse’s contacts with family living in India. Department Counsel 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation, and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant and his spouse have 
frequent contacts with their parents, who are living in India. Their loyalty and 
connections to family living in India are positive character traits. However, for security 
clearance purposes, those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under 
AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his spouse’s relationships with her relatives who are India citizens] could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. In 1996, Applicant immigrated to the United States 
from India, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2006. His spouse and two children are U.S. 
citizens, and live in the United States. When he took an oath and swore allegiance to 
the United States in 2006, as part of his naturalization as a U.S. citizen, and when he 
volunteered to assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, he manifested his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family living in India. 
Applicant and his spouse frequently communicate with their parents living in India. 
There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Indian Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or 
their family to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information.3 As such, there is 
a reduced possibility that Applicant or his family living in India would be specifically 
selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to 
his family living in India is from terrorists and other lawless elements and not the Indian 
Government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in India. 
Applicant and his spouse’s family in India could become potential targets of terrorists 
because of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant’s family from 
lawless elements in India.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in India. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with citizens or residents of India. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply to Applicant’s interest in the building owned by India 
company in India. Applicant has a substantial investment in India. His interest in the 
                                            
3There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
building in India is about 2.4 million dollars, which is ten times his income in 2013. AG ¶ 
8(f) applies to SOR ¶ 1.d. The amount of money that Applicant provides to his parents is 
insufficient in comparison to his assets and income to establish a security concern. SOR 
¶ 1.d is mitigated.   
 
In sum, Applicant and his spouse’s connections to family living in India are 
significant. They communicate with family in India frequently and are close to them. He 
travels to India almost every year and stays for two to three weeks. The month before 
his hearing, he went to India for almost 30 days. Security concerns are not analyzed in 
a piecemeal assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. The primary 
impediment to Applicant’s access to classified information is his interest, through his 
U.S. company, in the India company building, which amounts to over two million dollars. 
Once his U.S. company and Applicant have divested of their interest in India company 
and its primary asset, this impediment to his access to classified information could be 
mitigated. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are not mitigated at 
this time.     
 
Outside Activities 
 
AG ¶ 36 describes the outside activities security concern stating, “Involvement in 
certain types of outside employment or activities is of security concern if it poses a 
conflict of interest with an individual’s security responsibilities and could create an 
increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of classified information.” 
 
AG ¶ 37 describes the conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying under the outside activities guideline. AG ¶ 37 provides: 
 
(a) any employment or service, whether compensated or volunteer, with:  
 
(1) the government of a foreign country;  
 
(2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity;  
 
(3) a representative of any foreign interest; 
 
(4) any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person 
engaged in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on 
intelligence, defense, foreign affairs, or protected technology; and 
 
(b) failure to report or fully disclose an outside activity when this is 
required. 
 
AG ¶¶ 37(a)(2) and (4) apply. In 2009, Applicant advertised on the Internet that 
he was the founder, part-owner, chairman and CEO of India company, which was 
located in India and performing IT work. India company sought work in sensitive matters 
involving information technology.  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 38 provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
“(b) the individual terminated the employment or discontinued the activity upon being 
notified that it was in conflict with his or her security responsibilities.” Applicant’s 
involvement with India company has decreased, and he is no longer involved in the day-
to-day operations of that company. He has divested himself of his India company stock 
and his India company board membership. He has separated the operational IT 
features of his India company from his U.S. company. Applicant reduced his 
connections with India company and ensured that his India company and U.S. company 
are separate entities for work-related projects. AG ¶ 38(b) applies and outside activities 
concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and L in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2006, he swore 
allegiance to the United States. His spouse and two children are U.S. citizens and 
reside in the United States. His two brothers and their spouses and children live in the 
United States. He volunteered to serve as a contractor supporting the DOD. There is no 
evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements have specifically targeted Applicant.  
 
Applicant is an extraordinary businessman and leader. The growth and 
professionalism of his U.S. company has been so impressive that it has garnered 
publicity from U.S. national publications and awards from a state government. Applicant 
volunteers in support of religious endeavors in his state. He also volunteers and 
mentors to assist commercial opportunities and businesses in his state. He pays his 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
U.S. taxes. His contributions to his family, city, state, and the U.S. Government are 
remarkable, and his potential for even greater accomplishments is unlimited.   
       
A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.4 India is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and other lawless elements, but not as dangerous as many 
other countries. Terrorists continue to threaten the Indian Government, the interests of 
the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Indian 
Government does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in some 
instances. The United States and Indian Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. 
India and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. India and 
the United States have sometimes had profound policy disputes.     
 
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s parents 
and his spouse’s parents living in India, and his financial interest in the India company’s 
building in India that warrant greater weight than his connections to the United States. 
Applicant and his spouse’s parents are Indian citizens, who live in India. They frequently 
communicate with their parents. He travels to India annually. Applicant’s financial 
interest in the India property at 2.4 million dollars is about ten times his income in 2013.  
His close connections to family in India make Applicant more vulnerable as a target of 
coercion by lawless elements in India. His family and financial interests in India will be 
at a greater risk if his clearance is granted.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Although outside activities concerns 
are mitigated, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden and foreign influence 
concerns are not mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d to 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
17 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Paragraph 2, Guideline L:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
