 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00396 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 16 delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts totaling $23,242. She failed to provide sufficient documentation of 
the cause of and progress to resolve her financial problems. Financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2013, Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) versions of security clearance applications (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On March 30, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated May 12, 2014, was provided to her on May 20, 2014.1 Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.p.3 She also provided some extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old veterinary technician, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2012.4 In 1998, she graduated from high school. She attended 
community college from 1999 to 2000 and received a certificate. In 2006, Applicant 
married. Her children were born in 2007 and 2008.  
 
Applicant has never served in the military. Applicant did not describe any periods 
of her own unemployment. From August 2009 to December 2011, she worked in the 
private sector as a veterinary technician. From November 1998 to July 2009, she 
worked as an office manager. There is no evidence of security violations, criminal 
conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse. She disclosed her financial problems on 
her 2013 SF 86.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit report and SOR allege 16 delinquent, collection, or charged-off 
accounts totaling $23,242 as follows: (1) ¶ 1.a ($11,694) is a judgment owed to a bank 
resulting from a repossessed vehicle; (2) ¶ 1.b ($822) is a judgment; (3) ¶ 1.c ($6,034) 
is a judgment owed to a local government; (4)-(6) ¶¶ 1.d ($594), 1.e ($392), and 1.h 
($430); and (7)–(16) ¶¶ 1.f ($1,428), 1.g ($465), 1.i ($234), 1.j ($219), 1.k ($207), 1.l 
($185), 1.m ($164), 1.n ($129), 1.o ($123), and 1.p ($122) are medical collection debts. 
(Items 1, 4)  
 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated May 14, 2014, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated May 20, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after her receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 3)   
 
4 Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s September 23, 2013 SF 86 is the source for the facts in 
this paragraph and the next paragraph. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant explained that her husband’s pay decreased, and in 2010, her husband 
lost his job. Her family lost their ability to pay their mortgage and other debts. On May 
30, 2014, Applicant said that they were “now trying to repair our financial situation and 
repay debts.” (SOR response) She said she was going to start making payments on 
several debts on September 13, 2013. (Item 4) 
 
Notice to Applicant of Necessity for Additional Information 
 
The FORM states: 
 
Applicant's recent history of financial difficulties, and her apparent inability 
to resolve them, cast doubt as to her suitability to have access to classified 
information at this time. Absent significant evidence of mitigation or 
extenuation, this doubt must be resolved against the Applicant. In the 
absence of documentary evidence submitted in response to this 
FORM to show that Applicant has been able to regain some measure 
of financial stability through resolution of some of her delinquent 
debts and establish a legitimate track record of debt repayment, this 
concern must be decided against her in evaluating her suitability to 
have access to classified information.5 
 
Applicant’s FORM in its concluding paragraph repeated the admonition about the 
absence of corroborating documentation and other mitigating information and explained 
that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. . . If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on this FORM. (FORM at 6) Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM.               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
                                            
5FORM at 5 (emphasis in original; internal footnotes omitted). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit report and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleges 16 delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts totaling $23,242. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;6 and 
                                            
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to any debts. She did not provide sufficient 
information about her finances to establish her inability to make greater progress paying 
her creditors. Applicant’s husband’s unemployment and some medical expenses 
damaged the family finances and are circumstances largely beyond her control; 
however, she did not act responsibly under the circumstances. She did not establish 
how long he was unemployed or the amount of her income. She presented insufficient 
evidence about what she did over the last two years to pay her SOR debts.     
 
 Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the SOR 
creditors: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the 
creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact 
with the creditor;7 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
                                                                                                                                            
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to resolve 
these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of her SOR debts. There is insufficient evidence that her financial problems 
are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 34-year-old veterinary technician, who has worked for a defense contractor since 
January 2012. In 1998, she graduated from high school, and from 1999 to 2000, she 
attended community college and received a certificate. In 2006, Applicant married; and 
her children were born in 2007 and 2008. She did not describe any periods of her 
unemployment. Her husband’s decrease in pay and unemployment in 2010 contributed 
to her financial problems. She has several delinquent medical debts. Unemployment, 
underemployment, and medical problems are circumstances beyond her control. There 
is no evidence of security violations, criminal conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol 
abuse. She disclosed her financial problems on her 2013 SF 86.  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Her SOR alleges 
16 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts totaling $23,242. She failed to provide 
sufficient documentation of the cause of and progress to resolve her financial problems. 
                                                                                                                                            
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
She was well aware of her financial problems, as she listed them in her September 23, 
2013 SF 86. Her failure to provide more corroborating documentation shows lack of 
financial responsibility and lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts or documented financial progress 
is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
