 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00721 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOHA acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 19, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 9, 2014, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 23, 2014. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s discovery letter to Applicant and the exhibit index were marked 
as hearing exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the 
hearing. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. She 
submitted Applicant exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal letter was marked as HE III. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, although 
she stated that several of the debts were paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f and 1.g). She also 
stated that SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m were duplicate debts. The admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as a 
physician’s advocate and has held that position since September 2012. She has a high 
school diploma and has taken some college courses. She is married and has four 
children from earlier marriages. She has no military background.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts for a total of about $232,779. The debts 
were listed in a credit report from September 2013. She also admitted and discussed 
the listed delinquent debts in her trustworthiness determination interview with an 
investigator in October 2013.2  
 
 Applicant testified that her financial difficulties came about initially because of her 
divorce in 2008. She owned a home at the time and could not make the mortgage 
payments, which led to foreclosure. Additionally, she was unemployed from August 
2010 to January 2011 because she was terminated from her position for poor 
performance. She claimed her termination was due to a personality conflict with her 
supervisor. She receives $200 monthly child support from the father of her oldest child. 
The father of the two youngest children was making his required $1,000 monthly child 
support payments up until sometime in 2013 when he became unemployed. Now he 
sends “what he can, when he can.”3  
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1.a is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of $1,178. 
The last action on this account was in January 2013. Applicant claims she has 
contacted the creditor about returning the equipment to reduce the debt amount. No 
documentation was provided concerning this debt. This debt is unresolved.4  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 23-25; GE 1.  
 
2 GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 26, 38-40; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 33; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 The allegation at SOR ¶ 1.b is a delinquent medical account in the amount of 
$103. Applicant presented documentation showing the account was paid in May 2014. 
This debt is resolved.5 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.i are delinquent telecommunication 
accounts in the amounts of $380, $135, and $1,368. The last action on ¶ 1.c was in 
November 2009. The last action on ¶ 1.d was in March 2013. The last action on ¶ 1.i 
was in August 2013. Applicant testified she is working on payment plans for all these 
debts. No documentation was offered in support of payment plans for SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.d. She did present documentation showing that the creditor for SOR ¶ 1.i offered her a 
settlement payment plan, but there was no evidence of payment under the plan. These 
accounts are unresolved.6 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g are delinquent medical accounts in 
the amounts of $55, $115, and $761. Applicant presented documentation showing the 
debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f were paid in May 2014. Applicant testified that she now 
disputed the amount of SOR ¶ 1.g. She did not present documentation supporting the 
dispute.  SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are resolved. SOR ¶ 1.g is unresolved.7 
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1.h is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of $556. 
The last action on this account was in May 2012. Applicant claims she paid this account 
several years ago. No documentation was provided concerning this debt. This debt is 
unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1.j is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of $230. 
The last action on this account was in September 2013. Applicant stated that she is still 
attempting to contact the creditor. No documentation was provided concerning this debt. 
This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a past-due mortgage account that resulted in 
foreclosure. Applicant testified that she tried to reduce her mortgage payments by $300 
monthly in late 2008 or early 2009. No modification happened. She made partial 
payments for some time before foreclosure, but those payments were rejected by the 
lender. The house was not put on the market before foreclosure. She did not receive an 
IRS Form 1099 for cancelling this debt. She also stated that as a result of improper 
lending practices regarding her mortgage, she received an $800 settlement. She 
provided documentation showing that she received $800 in April 2013, but there is no 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 34-35; GE 2; AE E-1. 
 
6 Tr. at 36-37; GE 2; AE I. 
 
7 Tr. at 34, 36; GE 2; AE E-1, F. 
 
8 Tr. at 36; GE 2; AE A. 
 
9 GE 2; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
information about the source of this amount. She also failed to produce any documents 
about the settlement terms. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are medical collection accounts in the 
amounts of $250. These are duplicate debts. SOR ¶ 1.l is resolved for Applicant. 
Applicant is attempting to contact the creditor regarding this debt. SOR ¶ 1.m is not 
resolved.11 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. She testified that she typically 
has a few hundred dollars left over at the end of the month. Her submitted budget 
shows disposable income at the end of the month in the amount of $745.12 
 
 Applicant offered a character letter from a former employer. She attested to her 
competence, character and loyalty. Applicant also submitted her 2014 performance 
appraisal, which reflected an overall rating of “meets expectations.”13 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 60, 64-66, 68-70, 74; GE 2; AE H, J. 
 
11 Tr. at 37; GE 3; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. at 51; AE G. 
 
13 AE C-D. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  
 
6 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Although Applicant’s period of unemployment and her divorce could be 
considered beyond her control, she has had enough time and resources to address 
these debts. She has paid several of the smaller-balanced debts, but has not put forth 
responsible efforts to resolve the issues associated with the remaining debts. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Additionally, Applicant has not 
established payment plans for the unresolved debts. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply, and ¶ 
20(d) applies only to the paid debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any documentation supporting disputes of any debts. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite 
the presence of some mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information by considering the 
totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation were 
affected by her unemployment and her divorce. However, I also considered that despite 
these factors, most of the debts remain unaddressed. Her troublesome financial history 
causes me to question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.e – 1.f:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.g – 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph:   1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
