 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00723 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations, but he did mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F and Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 5, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 18, 2014. The Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 2014, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 23, 2014. However, because of a 
miscommunication Applicant did not appear. The hearing was rescheduled and held on 
August 13, 2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s discovery letters were marked as 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. His exhibit list was marked as HE III. Applicant testified 
and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into the record without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information, and 
he submitted AE F through P, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s transmittal memorandum was marked HE IV. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 21, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Answer), he admitted the allegations listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Those admissions are adopted as findings of fact. He denied the 
allegation listed in SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is married and has three adult children ages 26, 24, 
and 22. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, for ten years. He 
is a high school graduate who has taken some college courses. He has not served in 
the military and has never held a security clearance.1  
  
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal tax returns for the period 
2008 through 2011. Additionally, he owed federal taxes in the amount of approximately 
$18,000 for tax years 2008 and 2010 through 2012. The SOR also alleged that he failed 
to file state income tax returns for tax years 2003 through 2012. He also owes 
approximately $6,950 in unpaid state taxes. These allegations are supported by 
Applicant’s admissions in his security clearance application and his Answer.2  
 
 Applicant explained in his September 2013 security clearance application that the 
reason he didn’t file federal and state income tax returns was because his oldest child 
began attending college, followed by the younger two children. He stopped filing state 
income tax returns in 2003, when his oldest child was either 15 or 16 years old. During 
his hearing testimony, he stated that he was “scared” of the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) and that was another reason he did not file federal tax returns for the relevant 
years. He was “afraid” to file his taxes. He could not explain the reason for his fear. He 
knew he was required to file federal and state returns and he knew he owed taxes for 
those years, but he failed to file his returns. He continues to fear the IRS and avoids 
opening any mail from them addressed to him. During the time he was not filing federal 
or state tax returns, he was claiming ten dependents for tax withholding purposes, so 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7-8, 31, 33; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 
that the minimum amount would be withheld by his employer from his regular pay 
checks.3 
 
 Applicant presented documentary evidence showing that he filed his 2008 
through 2012 federal tax returns sometime in 2013. He also filed his 2013 federal return 
in a timely manner. He currently owes about $13,632 in federal back taxes for years 
2008 through 2012. He received a refund for tax year 2013 that was applied to his tax 
debt. Beginning in June 2013, he began making $300 monthly payments to the IRS. His 
bank statements for those periods show the payments to the IRS. He did not present 
any correspondence from the IRS reflecting the current status of any payment plan.4 
 
 Applicant has not filed his state tax returns for the period indicated. He was not 
even sure for what years he had not filed his state tax returns. He calms to have 
contacted the state taxing authority and was told to file his returns. He asked if the 
taxing authority could just estimate his taxes for the years he didn’t file and he was told 
they could do so and he would not have to file the returns. He did not present any 
written correspondence reflecting this conversation or agreement with the state taxing 
authority. He currently owes approximately $6,646 for tax years 2005 through 2007. He 
does not have a regular payment plan with the state for these delinquent taxes. He pays 
“chunks” when he can do so. He made two payments in April 2013 that went toward his 
delinquent 2010 state taxes ($1,579) and his 2013 taxes ($289).5 
 On April 3, 2013, Applicant completed a questionnaire for public trust position. 
He answered “yes” to the following questioning: “Are you now 180 days delinquent on 
any loan or financial obligation. Include loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the 
Federal Government?” If he responded “yes” to the question, he was asked to provide 
an entry for each reportable occurrence. He listed two entries. The first was for his 
“09/2012” home owner’s association (HOA) dues, and the second was for “taxes” for 
“04/2010 (Estimated)” to the “IRS”. On September 23, 2013, Applicant completed a 
security clearance questionnaire. He answered “yes” to the following question: “In the 
past seven years, have you failed to file or pay Federal, state, or other taxes when 
required by law or ordinance?” He went on to list and describe that for tax years 2008 
through 2012, he failed to file and pay his Federal and state taxes. The SOR alleged 
that he failed to disclose his 2008, 2009, and 2011 delinquent Federal and state debt in 
his April 2013 public trust position questionnaire.6 
 Applicant believed that the April 2013 questionnaire was only asking him for 
Federal debt obligations. He referenced the second question telling him to include all 
loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government as the source of 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 35-36, 52, 55. 
 
4 Tr. at 36, 54, 58; AE F, H, I, K-P. 
 
5 Tr. at 37-38, 57-58, 61; AE G, J. 
 
6 GE 1-2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
his understanding. Therefore, he did not believe he was required to list his state tax 
debts. He believed his use of “04/2010 (Estimated),” indicated that he was estimating 
for what years he owed federal taxes.7  
 Applicant presented his work appraisal forms for years 2009 through 2013. He 
was given the following overall rating for the respective years: 2009-Superior; 2010-
Superior; 2011-Superior; 2012-Strong; 2013-Strong. There are four rating levels: Needs 
Improvement, Solid, Strong, and Superior.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 45-47; GE 1, 3. 
 
8 AE A-E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has delinquent federal and state tax debts that remain unpaid or 
unresolved. He did not file his federal and state tax returns as required. He still has not 
filed his state tax returns. I find all the disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant’s tax debts are recent and remain unresolved. He has made some 
strides to address his tax obligations, in particular, filing his Federal tax returns and 
making regular monthly payments to the IRS. However, his irregular payments on his 
state tax obligation cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant used his 
children’s college expenses as a reason he failed to file his federal and state tax returns 
and pay the amount he owed for several years. Neglecting a citizen’s obligation to file 
and pay taxes in order to fund his children’s college education is not a condition beyond 
his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant presented no evidence of financial 
counseling, and while there is some evidence that Applicant has begun to address his 
federal tax issues, the state tax issues remain unresolved. His effort to resolve his 
federal tax issue only began once he was involved with the security clearance process. 
Evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to address his tax issues is lacking. I find 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . . 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant failed to completely list his federal tax obligations when he completed 
his 2013 public trust questionnaire. Giving him the benefit of the doubt and 
understanding his failure to list his state tax obligations were the result of misreading the 
question, Applicant unintentionally failed to list this state tax information. The same 
cannot be said for his failure to list all the years he owed a federal tax obligation. He 
stated that he knew he was required to file and that he knew that he owed federal taxes. 
After evaluating all the evidence, I find Applicant deliberately provided false information 
concerning his federal tax debts. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 Applicant corrected his federal and state tax information when he completed his 
September 2013 security clearance questionnaire. He stated the complete details of his 
obligation to both the state and Federal Government. There is no evidence to indicate 
he was confronted with the facts before he completed the September 2013 
questionnaire. AG ¶ 17(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s outstanding 
work record. On the other hand, I also considered that he failed to honor his obligation 
to file and pay both federal and tax taxes. He only recently filed his federal tax returns 
 
8 
 
 
for the years 2008 through 2013. He has not filed his state tax returns for the same 
period of time. He is paying monthly payments to the IRS, but a significant balance 
remains. He has no formal payment arrangement with the state. His indifference to his 
obligation to file and pay his taxes shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, but mitigated the Guideline E, personal conduct concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph:  2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
