 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01074 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD CAF could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant a security clearance. On May 19, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Department Counsel requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
July 18, 2014. On July 22, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for August 14, 2014. The hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called no 
witnesses, and offered no exhibits. The prehearing guidance letter sent to Applicant was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1) and Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked 
as HE 2. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on August 26, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old truck driver who works for a defense contractor. He 
has been working for his current employer since August 2013. He graduated from high 
school in 2000 and earned a certificate from a technical school in 2012. He is married 
and has two children, ages one and three. This is the first time that Applicant is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR listed four Guideline E allegations. They asserted that Applicant’s 
employment at a security firm (hereafter referred to a Company A) was terminated in 
January 2007 for falsifying documentation and not performing security checks (SOR ¶ 
1.a); that he falsified his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) 
of August 29, 2013, by failing to disclose his termination of employment from Company 
A and from two other companies (hereafter referred to as Company B and Company C) 
(SOR ¶ 1.b); that, during a personal subject interview, he stated that he was fired from 
Company C because he failed to disclose to that company his termination of 
employment from Company B (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that he made a false statement during 
an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview by claiming he forgot to report his 
termination of employment for cause from Company B when he filled out his e-QIP 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation. However, 
he stated that he was fired from Company A for no reason and claimed he neither 
falsified documentation nor failed to perform his security checks. His comments 
regarding SOR ¶ 1.a are considered a denial of that allegation.2 
 
From September 2004 to January 2007, Applicant was employed full time as a 
security guard at Company A. In that job, his duties included patrolling different floors of 
a building and recording his presence on the floors through an access card. The access 
card apparently showed that he was on a floor too long. He stated that he was 
terminated from that job for false documentation and not doing his security checks. As 
noted above, he claimed Company A had no valid basis for firing him. He stated that he 
performed the security checks and did not submit false documentation.3  
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 29-30, 34; GE 1, 3. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
3 Tr. 30-32; GE 1, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 
 
 Later in 2007, Applicant worked for a trucking company, Company B, for about 
one month. While working as a truck driver at Company B, he was involved in two 
mishaps in which he damaged trucks. In one mishap, he scraped a truck along a fence 
at a customer’s location. His supervisor gave him a warning for that first mishap. A 
couple of weeks later while backing a truck into a loading dock, he scraped another 
truck parked at the loading dock. He was fired from that job because of the second 
mishap.4 
 
 Following his termination from Company B, he began working for another 
trucking company, Company C, in 2007. At the start of that job, he was assigned to take 
a driver refresher class. He was fired from Company C before the refresher class was 
completed because that company learned he was fired from Company B and he had not 
reported that earlier firing to Company C. In an OPM interview on October 14, 2013, the 
OPM investigator reported, “He [Applicant] did not report working for this company 
[Company B] because he forgot about it.”5 
 
 On August 29, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. In Section 13C of the e-QIP, 
he was asked if, within the last seven years, he was fired from a job; quit a job after 
being told he would be fired; left a job by mutual agreement following charges or 
allegations of misconduct; left a job by mutual agreement following notice of 
unsatisfactory performance; or received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, 
suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace. He responded “No” to those 
questions and failed to disclose that he was fired from jobs at Companies A, B, and C in 
2007.6 
 
In Section 13A of that e-QIP, Applicant was asked to list his employment in the 
preceding 10 years. In Section 13A, he listed his employment with Company A and 
indicated that the reason he left that job was “to work for another company.” Section 
13A also specifically asked if he was fired from his job at Company A and he 
responded, “No.” In Section 13A, he did not list his employment with either Company B 
or Company C.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. 32-34; GE 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
5 Tr. 32-34; GE 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
6 Tr. 34-39; GE 1. In the SOR, the language from Section 13C is not quoted accurately. 
Apparently, the drafter of the SOR was using a different version of the e-QIP in drafting the SOR than the 
one Applicant signed. This variance is a harmless error, however, because the pertinent language in the 
SOR that asked whether Applicant was “Fired from a job” is the same in the signed e-QIP. Applicant was 
not misled by this SOR drafting error.    
7 Tr. 34-39; GE 1. Applicant’s failure to list his employment with Companies B and C in Section 
13A is not alleged as a falsification in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR cannot be used as a 
basis for denying a security clearance. Non-alleged conduct, however, may be considered to assess an 
applicant’s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). 
 
4 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified in part as follows: 
 
[Department Counsel]: All right. So the reason you didn’t list the prior 
firings in this security clearance application was because you didn’t want 
[your current employer] to know you had been fired previously. Right? 
 
[Applicant]: Yes. I didn’t want them to know because most likely when you 
put, you know, you‘ve been fired, you won’t get the job so I just didn’t put 
them on. 
 
*  *  *  
[Department Counsel]: Okay. All right. Let’s go back to that then. Whether 
it was during the first [OPM] interview on the 11th of October or the follow-
up phone call on the 14th, you intentionally omitted the information [about 
the firings] because you didn’t want your employer to know about it 
because you were afraid you might be fired? 
 
[Applicant]: I was afraid I wasn’t going to get the job. 
 
[Department Counsel]: So you lied. It doesn’t matter about the timing, I 
guess. In the end you lied. 
 
[Applicant]: Yes.8  
 
Applicant holds a Class A commercial driver’s license that authorizes him to drive 
18-wheel trucks. He testified that, if his supervisor was called as a witness, she would 
praise his performance and state he was a hard worker.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
8 Tr. 35-43. 
9 Tr. 43-46. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined will all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics including that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . .; (3) 
a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing . . . .  
 
In 2007, Applicant was fired from three jobs (SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.c). In 2013, he 
intentionally failed to disclose information about those firings in response to a question 
on his e-QIP (SOR 1.b).10 AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(d), and 16(e) apply. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleged that Applicant made a false statement to an OPM investigator 
on October 14, 2013, by stating he was fired by Company B for cause and forgot to 
report his employment with Company B when filling out his e-QIP. The summary of the 
October 14, 2013 interview reflected that Applicant told the investigator that he forgot to 
inform his next employer that he had worked for Company B. The summary makes no 
mention of him forgetting to disclose that he worked for Company B on his e-QIP. In 
fact, the summary does not mention the e-QIP. Even though Applicant admitted the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, it is inaccurate and misleading. Because this allegation did not 
provide Applicant adequate notice of the purported false statement in the OPM 
interview, I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.d.  
                                                          
10 SOR ¶ 1.b incorrectly alleged that Applicant responded to Section 13C of the e-QIP by 
indicating he left the employment of Company A by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance. However, he made no statement of that nature in the e-QIP. In Section 13A, he indicated 
that he left the employment of Company A “to work for another company.” The incorrect statement in 
SOR ¶ 1.b is harmless error because there is no reason to believe Applicant was confused or misled by 
that statement. 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, 
the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant was terminated from a job for submitting false documentation and not 
performing his duties as required. He intentionally concealed material information about 
being fired from a job from an employer and from the Federal Government. Such 
misconduct raises serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He receives credit for admitting his wrongdoing at the hearing. Nonetheless, 
insufficient time has passed to conclude that he has reformed and rehabilitated himself. 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
In the considering the evidence presented in light of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a), I 
conclude that Applicant failed to establish that he has reformed and rehabilitated 
himself. His falsifications remain a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns 
under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
