 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00764 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding criminal conduct, alcohol 
consumption, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application.1 On April 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated September 25, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Conduct), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 21, 2014. In a sworn statement, dated April 
24, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared 
to proceed on June 5, 2014. The case was assigned to me on June 16, 2014. A Notice 
of Hearing was issued on August 12, 2014, and I convened the hearing by video 
teleconference as scheduled on August 28, 2014.  
 
During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4) and one 
Applicant exhibit (AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 9, 2014. I kept 
the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that 
opportunity. He submitted additional documents which were marked as exhibits AE B 
through AE D and admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on 
September 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
pertaining to criminal conduct (¶ 1.a.) and alcohol consumption (¶ 2.a.). He also 
admitted, in part, and denied, in part, the allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 
3.a. through 3.d.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. He has been employed by the same defense contractor 
since November 1997.2 He worked at the same facility for ten years before joining his 
current employer.3 He has never served with the United States military.4  
 
A June 1971 high school graduate,5 Applicant attended some college classes but 
did not obtain a degree.6 Applicant was married in 1993 and divorced in 2011.7 He has 
one son, born in 1985.8  
                                                          
2
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8-9; Tr. at 32. 
 
3
 Tr. at 31. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
5
 GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated December 12, 2013), at 1; Tr. at 30. 
 
6
 Tr. at 30. 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Criminal Conduct and Alcohol Consumption   
 
On August 11, 2013, Applicant spent the day bush-hogging and working on 
shooting houses at his deer camp, where during a three-to-four hour period, he 
consumed eight to ten beers. He departed the deer camp, and while driving home, he 
came upon an accident scene with an upside down vehicle in his traffic lane. A deputy 
sheriff was directing traffic at the site and motioned Applicant to move his vehicle in a 
certain direction. Through miscommunication, Applicant misunderstood the deputy’s 
directions, and he drove his vehicle forward into the lane usually used by oncoming 
traffic. The deputy became angered and ordered Applicant to stop his vehicle. He also 
ordered Applicant to exit the vehicle. Applicant was asked if he had consumed alcohol, 
and when he acknowledged that he had done so, the deputy arrested him. He was 
transported to the detention center where he was administered a breathalyzer test 
which registered .18 which was over the legal limit.9 
 
Applicant was charged with driving under the influence 1st (DUI 1st) – a 
misdemeanor – and wrong way on one way street. Because he had no previous 
convictions, Applicant was charged as a first offender. After entering a not guilty plea to 
DUI 1st, he was found guilty, and ordered to pay a $400 fine and $300 in assessments. 
The remaining charge was eventually dismissed nolle prosequi.10 He never lost his 
driver’s license.11 On January 29, 2014, Applicant successfully completed the 12-hour 
state Alcohol Safety Education Program (ASEP).12  
 
Although Applicant has been consuming beer (he does not like the taste of 
whiskey) since he was 22 years old, the incident of August 2013 is his only incident 
involving DUI, criminal conduct, or the police.13 He has never been diagnosed or treated 
for alcohol abuse or alcoholism.14 He routinely undergoes random drug tests and has 
never had a positive test.15 Applicant conceded he made a bad mistake when he got 
behind the wheel after drinking and vows it will never happen again.16 Since he entered 
the ASEP program, Applicant has greatly modified his alcohol consumption, both in 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
9
 GE 3, supra note 5, at 2; Tr. at 36-38; GE 2 (Abstract of Court Record, undated). Applicant recalled his 
breathalyzer test result as registering .15, but the abstract lists it as .18. 
 
10
 GE 2, supra note 9; GE 4 (Agreed Order of Nolle Prosequi, dated June 2, 2014); GE 4 (Agreed Order 
Dismissing Appeal with Procedendo to the Justice Court, dated June 2, 2014); AE A (Notice of Appeal, dated 
December 19, 2013); AE B (Incomplete Copy of Agreed Order of Nolle Prosequi). 
 
11
 Tr. at 43. 
 
12
 AE C (ASEP Certificate, dated January 29, 2014). 
 
13
 GE 3, supra note 5, at 2-3; Tr. at 34, 49. 
 
14
 Tr. at 46, 48. 
 
15
 Tr. at 35. 
 
16
 Tr. at 36, 48-49. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
terms of frequency and quantity. He no longer drinks during the week, but continues to 
drink moderate quantities of beer (two or three) on Friday or Saturday.17 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On September 25, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
certain questions pertaining to his police record. The questions in Section 22 – Police 
Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had: been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him (not including citations 
involving traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300 and did not involve alcohol 
or drugs), and been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of 
law enforcement official. Another question asked if he had ever been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions. He 
certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false.  
 
 Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his responses and explained 
that he had simply answered the questions at that time with the mindset that he had not 
been convicted of any alcohol-related crime. In addition, Applicant’s attorney was of the 
opinion that he would be successful in having the charges dropped.18 Upon reflection, 
he now concedes that he made a mistake in his thinking, and he should have 
responded “yes” to the questions.19 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s maintenance manager is fully supportive of his application for a 
security clearance. He indicated that Applicant has been an outstanding employee, 
respected by all of his peers, and is considered hardworking, punctual, reliable, and 
trustworthy. He also noted that Applicant had been recognized as Employee of the 
Quarter on one occasion.20 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”21 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
                                                          
17
 Tr. at 46, 49. 
 
18
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated April 24, 2014. 
 
19
 Tr. at 45. 
 
20
 AE D (Character Reference, dated August 28, 2014). 
 
21
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”22   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”23 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.24  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
                                                          
22
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
23
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
24
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”25 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses is potentially disqualifying. 
Applicant’s history of criminal conduct consists of one arrest and conviction for DUI 1st –
a misdemeanor – and a charge, later nolle prossed, for wrong way on one way street. 
AG ¶ 31(a) has been established.   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
In addition, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. Applicant’s sole incident of criminal conduct 
occurred in August 2013, and there is no evidence that similar conduct occurred 
thereafter. To the contrary, other than that one incident, Applicant has never had any 
drug, alcohol, or other criminal incidents or problems.  
                                                          
25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
26
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
7 
                                      
 
One such incident, which occurred 13 months ago, during a lifetime of 61 years, 
appears to be aberrant behavior. Because he had no previous convictions, Applicant 
was charged as a first offender. Now aware of the impact of heavy drinking, and vowing 
not to find himself in a similar situation, such criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. There 
is substantial evidence of successful rehabilitation: Applicant has complied with his 
sentence by paying the fine and assessments; he has a good employment record; he 
has expressed genuine remorse; he has reformed his habits; and there has been no 
recurrence of criminal activity. A person should not be held forever accountable for an 
isolated incident of misconduct from the past, especially if there is a clear indication of 
subsequent reform, remorse, or rehabilitation. In this instance, I conclude that 
Applicant’s actions no longer cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. Applicant consumed eight to ten beers 
over a three-to-four hour period on August 11, 2013, and he was subsequently 
convicted of the charge of DUI 1st. AG ¶ 22(a) has been established. 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. It is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(a) 
where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 23(b), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated when the individual acknowledges his or her 
alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome 
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
 AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. As noted above, although Applicant has been 
consuming beer since he was 22 years old, the incident of August 2013 is his only 
incident involving DUI or the police. He has never been diagnosed or treated for alcohol 
abuse or alcoholism. He routinely undergoes random drug tests, and he has never had 
a positive test. Applicant conceded he made a bad mistake when he got behind the 
wheel after drinking and vows it will never happen again. Since he entered the ASEP 
program, Applicant has greatly modified his alcohol consumption, both in terms of 
 
8 
                                      
 
frequency and quantity. He no longer drinks during the week, but continues to drink 
moderate quantities of beer on Friday or Saturday. Applicant has taken full responsibility 
for his actions. He has a good employment record; he has expressed genuine remorse; 
he has reformed his habits; and there has been no recurrence of excessive alcohol 
consumption. In this instance, I conclude that Applicant’s isolated action of drinking and 
driving, which occurred 13 months ago, no longer casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Also, under AG ¶ 16(e), security concerns may be raised where there is  
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 Applicant consumed eight to ten beers over a three-to-four hour period on August 
11, 2013, and he was subsequently convicted of the charge of DUI 1st. Also, as noted 
above, on September 25, 2013, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
certain questions pertaining to his police record. The questions in Section 22 – Police 
Record asked if, in the last seven years, he had: been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against him (not including citations 
involving traffic infractions where the fine was less than $300 and did not involve alcohol 
or drugs), and been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of 
law enforcement official. Another question asked if, he had ever been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions. He 
 
9 
                                      
 
certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false.  
 
 Applicant’s responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submission 
was a deliberate falsification, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of 
misunderstanding on his part. Applicant subsequently denied intending to falsify his 
responses and explained that he had simply answered the questions at that time with 
the mindset that he had not been convicted of any alcohol-related crime. In addition, 
Applicant’s attorney was of the opinion that he would be successful in having the 
charges dropped. Upon reflection, Applicant now concedes that he made a mistake in 
his thinking, and he should have responded “yes” to the questions.  
 
 I have considered Applicant’s educational background and lengthy professional 
career in analyzing his actions. Applicant is an intelligent, talented, and experienced 
individual, and his explanation, under the circumstances, should be afforded some 
weight. His confusion and resultant actions are considered aberrant behavior out of 
character for him. His position is reasonable. As it pertains to the alleged deliberate 
falsifications, AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. As it pertains to the criminal conduct 
(DUI 1st), AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) 
may apply if the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. Similarly, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
 
Aside from Applicant’s issues with respect to his answers on his SF 86, his sole 
negative incident involves his conviction for DUI 1st – a misdemeanor. The incident 
occurred 13 months ago, during a lifetime of 61 years, and appears to be aberrant 
behavior. There is substantial evidence of successful rehabilitation: Applicant has 
complied with his sentence; he has a good employment record; he has expressed 
genuine remorse; he has reformed his habits; he has assessed the circumstances that 
resulted in his arrest and conviction, and taken positive steps to avoid such 
circumstances in the future; and there has been no recurrence of criminal activity. As 
indicated above, a person should not be held forever accountable for an isolated 
incident of misconduct from the past, especially if there is a clear indication of 
subsequent reform, remorse, or rehabilitation. In this instance, I conclude that 
Applicant’s actions no longer cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
  
 
10 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.27 
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. In August 2013, 
after consuming eight to ten beers over a three-to-four hour period, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with DUI 1st – a misdemeanor. One month later, before appearing 
in court for trial, he completed his SF 86 and falsely denied that in the last seven years, 
he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal 
proceeding against him (not including citations involving traffic infractions where the fine 
was less than $300 and did not involve alcohol or drugs), or arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal or any other type of law enforcement official. He also falsely 
denied that he had ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. After 
entering a not guilty plea to DUI 1st, in December 2013, he was found guilty and ordered 
to pay a $400 fine and $300 in assessments.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
The DUI incident occurred 13 months ago. Applicant is 61 years old, and in those years, 
he has been involved in only this one incident. He has never had any other drug, 
alcohol, or criminal incidents or problems. As for the falsifications, Applicant denied 
intending to falsify his responses and explained that he had simply answered the 
questions at that time with the wrong mindset that he had not been convicted of any 
alcohol-related crime, and he had been assured by his attorney that the charges would 
be dropped. Upon reflection, Applicant now concedes that he made a mistake in his 
thinking, and he should have responded “yes” to the questions. Based on his reputation, 
Applicant’s actions appear to be aberrant behavior. As noted above, there is substantial 
                                                          
27
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
evidence of successful rehabilitation: Applicant has complied with his sentence; he has 
a good employment record; he has expressed genuine remorse; he has reformed his 
habits; he has assessed the circumstances that resulted in his arrest and conviction, 
and taken positive steps to avoid such circumstances in the future; and there has been 
no recurrence of criminal activity, excessive consumption of alcohol, or questionable 
personal conduct.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Nevertheless, this decision 
should serve as a warning that the recurrence of criminal activity, excessive 
consumption of alcohol, or questionable personal conduct, will adversely affect his 
future eligibility for a security clearance.28 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9).  
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
                                                          
28
 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant, the decision, including the warning, should not 
be interpreted as being contingent on future monitoring of Applicant’s conduct. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) has no authority to attach conditions to an applicant’s security clearance. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 3.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
