 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-00212 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Use of information technology systems, handling protected information, and 
personal conduct security concerns were identified after Applicant left the employment 
of a defense contractor and began working for a competitor defense contractor. 
Applicant successfully mitigated those concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On March 
20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines M (use of Information 
technology systems), K (handling protected information), and E (personal conduct).  
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On May 2, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On July 14, 2014, Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 18, 2014, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On July 30, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 25, 2014. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received 
into evidence without objection. Applicant called three witnesses, testified, and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received into evidence without 
objection.  
 
 I held the record open until September 15, 2014, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE I and AE J, 
which was received into evidence without objection. On September 4, 2014, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted in part the SOR allegations with 
explanations. Applicant’s admissions and explanations are incorporated as findings of 
fact.   
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior software engineer, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since June 2012. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, 
which is a condition of his continued employment. Applicant has held a secret security 
clearance since 2008. (Tr. 35-37, 65-67, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science degree in aerospace engineering in 
May 1998, and a master’s degree in software engineering in May 2000. (Tr. 36, 66-67, 
GE 1.) He married in February 1999, and has five minor children. Applicant’s wife does 
not work outside the home. (Tr. 35, 65-66, GE1.) He has not served in the armed 
forces. (Tr. 35, GE 1.) 
 
Use of Information Technology Systems/Handling Protected Information/Personal 
Conduct 
 
The facts of this case involve Applicant’s purported misuse of information 
technology, his purported failure to protect sensitive information, and the 
misrepresentation of his conduct surrounding these events. Applicant was previously 
                                            
1
Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
employed by defense contractor (DCA) from June 2008 to June 2012 as a senior staff 
software engineer until he began his current employment with defense contractor (DCB) 
in June 2012 as a senior software engineer. DCA and DCB are competitor defense 
contractors. (Tr. 36-38, GE 1.) It is not disputed that in May 2012 before leaving DCA, 
Applicant copied DCA proprietary data from his DCA computer workstation to an 
external hard drive belonging to DCA. He took the DCA external hard drive home and 
then copied and/or downloaded data files to his personal computer.  (Tr. 36-39, 58-63, 
SOR answer.) 
 
Applicant disputes the allegation that he accessed the external hard drive 
remotely from home or that he transmitted sensitive data over a network from a remote 
location, or that he failed to safeguard the data from his workstation to his home 
computer and back. He cited a past example of how DCA allowed him to take his entire 
workstation home following a major storm. He further disputes that he remotely 
accessed data from home suggesting that he copied sensitive data over an unsecure 
network. He stated that he copied the data to an external hard drive, that he copied the 
data to his home computer, and returned the drive to DCA. Applicant asserted that it 
was customary for DCA to allow employees to take data home so that he could work at 
home. His purpose in taking the work home was to complete DCA tasks. Applicant’s 
testimony was credible and not rebutted.2 (Tr. 39-40, 60-65, SOR answer.)  
 
More problematic for Applicant, however, are integrity allegations. On June 27, 
2012, after Applicant began working for DCB, he was summoned to the DCB corporate 
offices and was queried by DCB’s General Counsel (GC) whether he had DCA data at 
his home. He denied that he did, which was not true. Recognizing that he had not been 
truthful and after consulting his pastor, Applicant sent a letter dated July 6, 2012 to 
DCA’s GC, copying DCB’s GC and senior vice-president, advising that he had not been 
truthful during his June 27, 2012 DCB GC interview.3 He discussed his failure to follow 
protocol and characterized his impromptu answers as “a disheartening act of self-
preservation over full disclosure and honesty.” Applicant recognized at the time that he 
submitted his July 6, 2012 letter that he was exposing himself to adverse action to 
include losing his job with DCB. (Tr. 40-61, SOR answer, GE 2, GE 3, GE 4, AE A.) 
 
Also problematic for Applicant is an allegation that during his DCA May 31, 2012 
exit interview, approximately nine days before his last day at DCA, he stated that he had 
not retained any DCA confidential or proprietary information. At the time of his exit 
interview Applicant advised the human resource manager (HRM) that he had files at 
home that he was working on. The HRM directed him to check the block indicating that 
he had not retained any DCA data because she would not be in her office on his last 
                                            
2
 Applicant’s testimony was corroborated in the form of a DCB GC June 2012 letter to DCA’s GC, 
particularly as it pertains to his purported failure to safeguard DCA sensitive data from DCB’s GC and the 
fact that he was allowed to work on DCA projects at home as he did. (GE 2.) 
 
3
 Shortly after Applicant’s July 6, 2012 letter, DCA filed a lawsuit against him. The lawsuit was 
settled on September 25, 2012. Under the terms agreed upon, he is prohibited from discussing settlement 
terms. (Tr. 50-51.) Applicant remains a DCB employee in good standing. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
day of work, June 8, 2012. Applicant’s testimony was credible and not rebutted. (SOR 
answer.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant called three credible character witnesses to testify on his behalf. These 
witnesses have been associated with Applicant on a professional basis, have security 
clearances, and are familiar with the requirements of holding a security clearance. In 
spite of the SOR allegations, the witnesses remained steadfast in their support of 
Applicant. The witnesses emphasized Applicant’s work ethic, good character, and 
trustworthiness. (Tr. 17-34.) Additionally, Applicant submitted three work-related 
reference letters that echoed the witnesses’ favorable testimony. The reference letters 
also discussed the significant contribution Applicant makes in support of the national 
defense. (AE D - AE F.) Lastly, Applicant submitted two awards he received at DCA, his 
most recent DCB performance evaluation (2/2/13 – 1/31/14), and a DCB merit pay 
increase and promotion. His performance rating was favorable enough to warrant a 
salary increase. (AE G – AE J.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern relating to use of information technology 
systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
 
 Potentially disqualifying conditions under this concern are: AG ¶ 40(c) “use of 
any information technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to 
a compartmented area within the same system;” AG ¶ 40(f) “introduction, removal, or 
duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information 
technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, 
guidelines, or regulations;” and AG ¶ 40(g) “negligence or lax security habits in handling 
information technology that persist despite counseling by management.” 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 There are three mitigation conditions under this guideline that potentially apply: 
AG ¶ 41(a) “so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment;” AG ¶ 41(b) “the misuse 
was minor and done only in the interest of organizational efficiency and effectiveness, 
such as letting another person use one’s password or computer when no other timely 
alternative was readily available;” and AG ¶ 41(c) “the conduct was unintentional or 
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good faith effort to correct the situation and 
by notification of a supervisor.” 
 
 Applicant took work home to ensure that he completed a DCA project before he 
left their employment. Although he did not specifically request permission to do so in 
this particular case, Applicant submitted sufficient evidence to establish that taking work 
home in the manner that he did was common practice. A similar situation is unlikely to 
reoccur. It also became clear that Applicant’s motivation for taking work home was to 
complete his work before leaving DCA and not for any other reason. Applicant notified 
DCA’s HRM during his exit interview that he was working on DCA files at home; 
however, she directed him to check the box that he did not have any DCA files in his 
possession because she was not going to be in the office on the last day of his 
employment. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 41(a), 41(b), and 41(c) are applicable. 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern relating to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
 
 Potentially disqualifying conditions under this concern are: AG ¶ 34(b) “collecting 
or storing classified or other protected information at home or in any other authorized 
location;” and AG ¶ 34(g) “any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified 
or other sensitive information.” 
 
 There are three mitigation conditions under this guideline that potentially apply: 
AG ¶ 35(a) “so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment;” AG ¶ 35(b) “the individual 
responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now demonstrates 
a positive attitude toward the discharge or security responsibilities;” and AG ¶ AG 35(c) 
“the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.” 
 
  The discussion under Use of Information Technology Systems is applicable 
under this section. Applicant has assimilated well into his new position with DCB and 
has received security training consistent with his responsibilities. His witnesses and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
character references made it clear that he demonstrates a positive attitude towards his 
security responsibilities. Whatever security training DCA may have given Applicant was 
undermined by the informal practices condoned by management to get the job done. 
Applicant cited examples of having taken work home to include propriety data on 
several occasions without consequences while a DCA employee. Mitigating conditions 
AG ¶¶ 34(a), 35(b), and 35(c) are applicable. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
A potentially disqualifying condition under this concern is: AG ¶ 16(b) 
“deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to any 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
government representative.” 
 
There are three mitigation conditions under this guideline that potentially apply: 
AG ¶ 17(a) “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;” AG ¶ 17(c) “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and AG ¶ 17(d) 
“the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.”  
 
The discussion under Use of Information Technology Systems and Handling 
Protected Information is applicable under this section. Ten days after Applicant lied to 
DCB’s GC regarding DCA data, he “came clean” and wrote a letter to DCA’s GC with a 
copy to DCB’s GC and senior vice-president admitting his misrepresentation. The fact 
that he was the sole income earner supporting a wife and five minor children is not lost 
on me. Applicant put his career and ability to support his family in jeopardy. This 
process was clearly a painful lesson for Applicant. His purported May 31, 2012 
misrepresentation during his DCA exit interview is mitigated by the fact that he informed 
the DCA HRM that he had DCA data at home. Furthermore, Applicant was using the 
DCA data to complete his project before he left DCA’s employment and such was an 
accepted DCA practice at that time. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(d), and 17(d) 
are applicable. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines M, K, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old senior software engineer, who has worked for his 
employer since 2012 and has held a security clearance since 2008. He is sufficiently 
mature to understand and comply with his security responsibilities. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. The most serious 
allegation Applicant faced are the integrity issues surrounding his June 2012 interview 
with DCB’s GC. He was able to overcome his lapse in judgment by the subsequent 
corrective action he took. It was no small undertaking for Applicant to “come clean” to 
put in writing that he had lied knowing that he would run the risk of being professionally 
ruined and putting his family’s future at risk. I am satisfied that Applicant recognizes the 
Government’s concerns in this case. The unique circumstances that led to these 
security concerns are unlikely to occur again. However, if such circumstances ever did 
arise again, I am confident that Applicant would not make the same mistake again. 
 
Lastly, Applicant’s character letters and witness testimony attest to his good 
character for trustworthiness, diligence, responsibility, and conscientious, detail-oriented 
contributions to his employer and community. He is a valued employee who is making a 
contribution to the national defense, a dedicated family man, and contributing member 
of society.  It is also apparent that this process made a significant and lasting 
impression on the Applicant. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person. I conclude handling protected 
information, use of information technology systems, and personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2: Guideline K:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3: Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
