 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01045 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 13, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On April 
30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On May 14, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On July 14, 2014, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 18, 2014, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On July 30, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 
25, 2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call any 
witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were 
received into evidence without objection.  
 
 I held the record open until September 15, 2014, and granted Applicant an 
extension until September 22, 2014, to afford him the opportunity to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely submitted AE O and AE EE, which was received into 
evidence without objection. On September 4, 2014, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted in part and denied in part the allegations 
with explanations. Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old senior manager, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since November 1996. He seeks to retain his security clearance, 
which is a requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 14-17.)  
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science degree in computer science in 
May 1986 and a master’s of science degree in computer science in June 1993. He 
also took some continuing education classes as well as “some Ph.D. classes,” but did 
not pursue an additional higher degree. (GE 1, Tr. 17-19.)  
 
Applicant married in December 1987, and divorced in August 2010.1 He has 
three adult children – a 25-year-old son, and two daughters ages 23, and 20. 
Applicant’s son and youngest daughter are partially dependent on him for support. 
(GE 1, Tr. 19-22.) When Applicant’s children had reached the age of majority, they 
chose to live with him. His son currently lives at home as well as his youngest 
daughter when she is not attending college. His oldest daughter is married and 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s former spouse filed for divorce in October 2009.  
 
3 
 
 
financially independent. (AE O, Tr. 63-64.) Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed 
forces. (GE 1.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains five separate allegations – a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
filed in May 2012 and dismissed in September 2013 and four charged-off accounts 
totaling $44,415.  
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a very costly 2010 divorce and a 
judgment awarded to his former in-laws. He was initially ordered to pay his former 
spouse alimony at $1,200 a month that increased to its current rate of $2,900 a month. 
That amount will increase to $3,500 a month when their youngest daughter graduates 
from college in two years. His former spouse took him to court several times to get 
more money and had all of his assets frozen. During this time, Applicant was 
responsible for paying college expenses for his two oldest children and private school 
tuition for his youngest daughter as well as making the house payment. Applicant’s 
former spouse refused to cooperate in setting a reasonable selling price for their 
marital home which prolonged the time Applicant was required to make house 
payments. His former spouse also failed to honor her agreement to repay one-half of 
the debt to her parents. At one time during their divorce, Applicant had a negative $1.2 
million balance in his bank accounts and 25% of his pay garnished. Their house 
eventually went into foreclosure and Applicant was forced to move out and rent a 
townhouse for himself and his children. Applicant was able to turn the momentum 
around; however, not before he had incurred significant financial damage. (Tr. 22-28, 
41-49.) 
 
Applicant is still recovering from the financial fallout following his 2010 divorce 
and judgment; however, he is well on the way to regaining financial responsibility. 
Below follows a summary of Applicant’s SOR allegations/debts and their current 
status. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in May 
2012 that was dismissed in September 2013. That is correct. After Applicant’s divorce, 
his former in-laws filed suit against him to recover the $210,000 which he thought was 
a gift to him and his then wife. His former in-laws were awarded a $235,000 judgment 
in March 2012. Following the judgment, Applicant’s former in-laws had his bank 
accounts frozen and garnished his wages. Having no funds to meet his expenses or 
provide for his children, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. Applicant was 
then able to settle with his former in-laws for $160,000 and convert his Chapter 7 to 
Chapter 11.2 Having complied with the terms of his Chapter 11 bankruptcy, the 
presiding judge ordered it closed in September 2013. (GE 3, Tr. 29-34.)  
ALLEGATION RESOLVED. 
 
                                                          
2
 Applicant settled with his former in-laws for $160,000 at 5% interest with a ten-year note 
making $1,700 monthly payments. (Tr. 32.) 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $4,506. While 
Applicant was going through Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings, neither the creditors 
nor Applicant were allowed to contact each other. After Applicant’s Chapter 7 petition 
was dismissed, his attorney notified his creditors and informed Applicant that all of his 
credit card debts had “been written off.” In any event, this creditor contacted Applicant 
and they reached a settlement in which Applicant would make six monthly payments 
of $1,123 beginning in May 2014. As of the hearing date, Applicant had made five of 
the six monthly payments. Post-hearing, Applicant provided documentation of the sixth 
and final payment. (GE 5, AE J, AE O, AE P, Tr. 34-38.) DEBT RESOLVED.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – Charged-off credit card account in the amount of $10,200. Creditor 
wrote off this debt and issued Applicant a Form 1099-C for this account in January 
2014. Applicant reported this write-off as income on his 2013 federal income tax 
return. (SOR answer, GE 4, GE 5, Tr. 38-41.) DEBT RESOLVED.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e – Charged-off credit card accounts to same credit card 
company in the respective amounts of $18,657 and $11,052. These accounts were 
opened in 2002 and charged-off in 2012 after Applicant filed bankruptcy. Applicant 
contacted the creditor and determined that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d was not in his name, 
but rather was in his former spouse’s name and the creditor refused to discuss the 
account further with him. However, the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e was in his name. The 
amount due was no longer $11,052, but $5,894. Applicant and the creditor settled the 
account for $3,540 to be paid in five $708 monthly payments. He is making those 
payments by direct debit. Applicant provided documentation supporting same. (GE 4, 
AE O, AE DD, AE EE, Tr. 41-53.)  DEBT(S) RESOLVED OR BEING RESOLVED. 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing budget reflects a gross monthly income of $14,821, 
with a net monthly remainder of $2,626. (AE O, AE R, Tr. 53-62.) It is clear from his 
budget that he is living within his means being mindful of his obligations to budget 
enough funds to pay off his creditors.  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant provided work performance evaluations from his employer covering 
the timeframe 2009 to 2013. These five years of evaluations reflect sustained superior 
performance. (AE Z – AE CC.) Additionally, Applicant submitted seven reference 
letters from a wide range of individuals to include a former supervisor, senior co-
workers, and friends.  (AE S – AE Y.) These references reflect that Applicant is a 
trustworthy individual of strong moral character. His work-related references convey 
that he is a very valued and trusted employee, who is making a significant contribution 
to the defense industry. 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
5 
 
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
 
6 
 
 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s separation, 2010 
divorce, and subsequent financial fallout could not have been anticipated. Rarely does 
one encounter a divorce with such severe financial consequences in this venue.  
Applicant remained in contact with his creditors to the extent he was allowed as a 
result of pending bankruptcy proceedings.  As noted above, Applicant has paid, 
settled, or otherwise resolved all of his debts and has made substantial progress in 
regaining financial responsibility.3  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. Applicant benefited from the financial counseling 
available through the bankruptcy process and his financial situation is clearly on the 
mend. Applicant’s budget demonstrates that he is living within his means. Applicant 
produced sufficient documentation to warrant full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).4 
Applicant has resolved or is in the process of resolving all of his SOR debts.  AG ¶ 
20(e) is not relevant. 
                                                          
3
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
4
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 18 years of sustained and honorable service with his defense 
contractor employer weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within 
his means, and his SOR debts have been addressed. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
 
9 
 
 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been paid or are in a payment plan. Due to 
circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite Applicant’s 
recent financial setback as a result of a most contentious and costly divorce, it is clear 
from his actions that he is on the road to a full financial recovery. These factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his performance evaluations, 
his reference letters, his devotion and loyalty to his children, and his testimony and 
demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated 
the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
