1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00506
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
September 22, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J and E J for Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 21, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on May 12, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 12,
2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled by video teleconference, on July 16,
2014. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A and B, which
were also admitted without objection. Two additional witnesses also testified on
Applicant’s behalf. The record was left open until July 30, 2014 to allow Applicant to
submit additional evidence into the record. Applicant submitted additional documents,
2
which were identified as Exhibit C, D, and E and were also admitted without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on August 1, 2014. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and all the testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record discussed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 33 years old. He has been married to his current wife since
September 2, 2009, and he has one son. He was married to his previous wife from 2004
to 2007.  He served in the United States Marine Corps (USMC) from January 2003 until
April 2013, reaching the rank of Staff Sergeant, when he was involuntarily separated
from military service. Applicant received two Bachelor of Arts degrees, one in Human
Services and the other in Electricity and Electronics Technology.  Applicant is employed
by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct, which
create doubt about a person’s judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness. The specific
allegation is that in approximately June 2011, Applicant, while in the USMC, altered his
divorce decree so that he could continue to receive basic allowance for housing
entitlements, for which he was not eligible.  On April 3, 2012, he was convicted at a
Special Court-Marital of violating the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) Article 121
(Larceny) and Article 123 (Forgery), and was sentenced to a formal reprimand, 60 days
confinement, and forfeiture of $6,000. Applicant was later involuntarily separated from
military service.
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted that he was involuntarily separated from military
service, and initially issued the sentencing as described above, but ultimately he was not
confined or ordered to pay a fine. During the hearing, Applicant testified that he
knowingly altered the year of his final divorce decree from 2007 to 2009, misrepresenting
to the USMC that he had been married for two more years than he was actually married.
He testified that he considered whether or not to make the change to the document for
approximately three months before he took action. He conceded that he was always
aware that it was not appropriate or correct to make the changes he was contemplating,
but he ultimately decided to change the documentation. (Tr at 26-29.) By Applicant’s
action of misrepresenting that he was legally married longer than he actually was, he
was able to collect additional housing benefits than those to which he was legally
entitled. Applicant stated that in late 2008, he received the divorce decree, showing that
he was legally divorced. In 2011, he submitted the altered divorce decree to the military,
because he had remarried and he had to show that his first marriage had ended. For
three years, from 2008 to 2011, Applicant fraudulently failed to notify the USMC that he
3
was divorced in 2007. By this misrepresentation, he was able to receive between $300
and $400 a month more than the correct amount to which he was entitled.  (Tr at 37-42.) 
Applicant testified that it became apparent to the Installation Personnel
Accountability Center (IPAC), the organization to which he submitted the documentation,
that the document had been altered. He was confronted and ordered to speak with an
investigator in June 2011, and he immediately admitted his guilt. Applicant claimed that
because of his expeditious repair of his actions by paying back all the money that was
overpaid, considered with his career prior to this incident, that he was able to enter a
plea bargain so the confinement time was waived. Applicant repaid between $14,000
and $16,000 that had been overpaid based on the false information that he furnished to
the Government, and his last payment was in October 2011. Applicant attempted to
reenlist after his Court-Martial, but he was informed that he would not be allowed to
reenlist. He was ultimately issued an Honorable Discharge in April 2013.  (Tr at 30-32.) 
Applicant testified that he believed this incident was not typical of his character or
the rest of his career in the USMC. He averred that he has “learned an extensive amount
as to character development following this incident,” and that this is “definitely a one-time
instance.” (Tr at 53-54.) 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E- Personal Conduct) 
2.a. The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.
It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s conduct as alleged in paragraph 1, above,
makes Guideline E applicable to this case.
In his RSOR, Applicant denied that he attempted to lie or cover up his Court-
Martial. He further wrote that any appearance of dishonesty is because of an oversight or
confusion during the investigation process. 
Mitigation
Applicant testified and submitted a DD Form 214 to confirm that during his time in
the USMC, Applicant received the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, three
Marine Corps Good Conduct Medals, the Afghan Campaign Medal with one star and the
Iraq Campaign Medal. While his DD Form 214 shows one star, Applicant stated that he
actually did four deployments. (Exhibit A.)  (Tr at 36.) 
As stated above, two additional witnesses testified on behalf of Appellant. The first
witness has known Applicant as Applicant’s direct supervisor since he began working
with Applicant on February 17, 2014. He described Applicant as “dedicated,”
“knowledgeable,” and “trustworthy.” This witness knew nothing about the concerns
addressed in the SOR. (Tr at 63-66.) The second witness also works for the same
company as Applicant in a management position. He has known Applicant since he
started managing him in August 2013. He described Applicant as “very trustworthy,” and
4
someone he “would hire again.”  The second witness also was unaware of the concerns
addressed in the SOR. (Tr at 67-72.) Because neither witness was aware of Applicant’s
conduct that is the subject of the SOR and the security clearance hearing, I find their
testimony to have limited value
Applicant submitted several of his Commandant’s Guidance, his USMC
evaluations. (Exhibit C.) Most of his ratings were in the “One of the many highly qualified
professionals who form the majority of this grade,” but he also received evaluations of
“One of the few exceptionally qualified Marines.” Applicant submitted a Certificate of
Recognition that he received in May 2014, in his current employment, for his outstanding
productivity and dedication. (Exhibit D.) Finally, Applicant submitted a letter from a
captain in the USMC, who was Applicant’s direct supervisor, dated July 16, 2014. The
captain was extremely laudatory of Applicant’s Marine service, and he believed that
Applicant has learned from his previous conduct, and “has the capacity to serve any role
that is afforded to him.” (Exhibit E.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)
The Government has established that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct that
occurred during a three year period, from 2008 through 2011, when Applicant’s actions
of knowingly submitting false documents to the USMC for financial gain were discovered.
Especially significant is that Applicant admitted he considered whether or not to commit
the forgery for three months before he did it, and he only stopped his conduct after it was
discovered. Among the disqualifying conditions, I find that ¶ 31(a), “a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” applies in this case. ¶ 31(c), “allegations or
admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,”
is also applicable to this case. 
While Applicant’s remorse appears sincere, because of the recency, duration, and
wilfulness of the conduct, and the fact that Applicant only stopped the conduct after his
actions were discovered, I cannot find that any mitigating conditions under ¶ 32 are
applicable. I find Paragraph 1 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, against Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
With respect to Personal Conduct, the Government relies heavily on the honesty
and integrity of individuals seeking access to our nation’s secrets. If such an individual
intentionally falsifies material facts or fails to furnish relevant information to the
Government, it is extremely difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the
judgment, and honesty necessary for an individual given a clearance.
In this case the evidence clearly establishes that Appellant knowingly furnished
untruthful information to the USMC for unearned and unjustified financial gain. In
reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Personal Conduct ¶16, I conclude that ¶
16(a) applies because of Applicant’s “deliberate omission, . . . of relevant facts from any .
. . personnel security questionnaire . . ., or similar form used to determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status.” I do not find that any mitigating condition is
applicable under ¶17. Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits questionable
6
judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty and unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations. I, therefore, resolve Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct, against
Applicant.
 Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions are applicable and why the mitigating conditions do
not apply under both guidelines alleged, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
       In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
        
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
