                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        -------------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  14-00629           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 13, 2014, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 18, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on July 23,
2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-2). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and four exhibits (AEs A-D). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on July 30, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with accounting information that he
furnished his accountant in 2013. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 11 days
to supplement the record. The Government was afforded two days to respond. 
Within the time requested, Applicant documented his automatic extension requests
for the filing of his federal tax returns and accounting activity in 2013. Applicant’s
submissions were admitted as AE E.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file federal and state tax returns
for tax years 2010 and 2011 and (b) accumulated three delinquent debts approximating
$200. These debts allegedly remain unpaid.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied allegations he failed to file federal
and state tax returns. He admitted two of the three alleged debts, but denied the third one
covered by subparagraph 1.e. He claimed he filed federal and state returns for tax years
2010 and 2011 and received refunds. He claimed the medical debts alleged in
subparagraphs 1.c-1.d belong to his 20-year-old daughter, who is covered by his medical
insurance policy. Applicant claimed he became aware of his daughter’s bills only after
receiving a collection notice mailed to him. He claimed he found out about the debt
covered by subparagraph 1.e in his security clearance interview and challenges the
validity of the debt.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old senior quality engineer of a defense contractor who
seeks the continuation of the security clearance he was first granted in May 1989. (GE 1)
The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are incorporated and
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in October 1991 and has two adult children from this marriage.
(GE 1; Tr. 55) He earned a bachelor’s degree in industrial electronics engineering in May
1989 and a master’s degree in systems engineering in 2013, both from recognized
universities (GE 1; Tr. 34)  Applicant claims no military service.
3
Before accepting his current position in April 2010, Applicant was unemployed for
several months (i.e., November 2009 to April 2010). Between July 2005 and November
2009, he worked for automotive firms: as a senior quality engineer with his first employer
and as a quality systems management team leader for his latter employer. (GE 1; Tr. 36-
37)  Currently, he works as a team lead for his employer’s supply development and
quality group. (Tr. 34)
Applicant’s finances
In the security clearance application (e-QIP) he completed in September 2013,
Applicant noted that he failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for the tax
years of 2010 and 2011. (GE 1) He acknowledged no “logical explanation or excuse for
not filing,” and assured he was in the process of filing his returns for both 2010 and 2011.
Based on the data he furnished his accountant, Applicant expected to receive refunds for
both years. (GE 1) 
Applicant obtained automatic extensions for filing his federal and state tax returns
for the 2010 and 2011 filing years. (AE E)  He provided no documentation of obtaining
additional extensions. Applicant filed his federal and state tax returns for the 2010 and
2011 tax years in December 2013. (AE E; Tr. 38-40)  He received refunds on his federal
returns for both 2010 and 2011 in 2014: $1,159 on his 2010 return and $195 on his 2011
return. (AEs A-B and E; Tr. 47-51)  On his 2010/2011 state returns he received refunds of
$100 for each tax year in 2014. (Tr. 51-52) Applicant has since filed timely tax returns for
2012 and 2013. (Tr. 42)
Applicant attributes his failure to file his tax returns timely to complications in his
paper work associated in part with periods of unemployment and his wife’s medical
issues. (Tr. 38-39)  Applicant’s documented returns reveal his forwarding tax information
to his accountant in March 2013, filing his returns in December 2013, and receiving tax
refunds in 2014. (AE E; Tr. 78-80)  
By the time an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) came
to interview Applicant about his security clearance application in 2013, Applicant had
already provided the required accounting information to his accountant. (Tr. 75-76)
Applicant’s explanations are credible and are accepted. Applicant never pursued financial
counseling. 
Besides failing to file timely federal and state tax returns, Applicant accumulated
two delinquent medical debts of $99 and $71 respectively. (GEs 1 and 2) The medical
debts (creditors 1.c and 1.d) reflect unpaid cost shares by Applicant’s 20-year-old
daughter who was listed as an insured on Applicant’s medical insurance policy. (GE 2; Tr.
32, 35-36) Addressing the listed creditor 1.e utility debt, Applicant expressed unfamiliarity
with this debt and has initiated efforts to get the debt removed from his credit report. (Tr.
33-34, 46) Applicant did not become aware of the medical or utility debts until he was
interviewed by an OPM agent in 2013. (Tr. 31, 45)  He has since paid the two medical
debts. (AE C; Tr. 45) 
4
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
5
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file federal and
state income tax returns for 2010 and 2011 and his history of accumulating three small
delinquent medical and utility debts totaling a little more than $200.  He attributed his
filing delays to unemployment and paper work complications associated with his wife’s
medical issues. Lack of knowledge and familiarity with the debts was his assigned
reason for not addressing the listed debts earlier in time. Applicant’s delinquent federal
and state tax filings and outstanding account balances have since been addressed. 
6
Applicant’s delinquent debts were small in number and amounts (just over $200),
but still raise some security concerns when considered in conjunction with his late
federal and state tax filings. His filing delays and accrued debts raise potential security
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in managing his personal
finances. Applicant’s actions warrant the application of three of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts;” DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and DC ¶ 19(g),
“failure to file annual [f]ederal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the
fraudulent filing of the same.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s failure to file timely federal and state tax returns cannot be considered
to be the result of extenuating circumstances. He had held a security clearance for a
considerable number of years and was aware of the importance of filing timely tax
returns. He offered no excuses for his past filing failures in his E-Qip. (GE 1)  Cited
complications with his compiling the requested accounting information required by his
accountant inferentially played only a small role in his failure to attend to these matters
in a timely way. 
By contrast, Applicant’s lack of familiarity with the two medical debts at issue  can
be characterized as extenuating and a plausible explanation of why he failed to address
these debts before they became delinquent. Considered together, Applicant’s reasons
for failing to address his medical debts before they became delinquent are sufficient to
warrant application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  
Applicant received no financial counseling that would entitle him to any additional
mitigation credit. His accepted good-faith dispute of his creditor 1.e debt (which he does
not recognize) entitles him to application of MC ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  
By filing his federal and state tax returns (albeit out of time) and settling or
resolving all but one of his listed delinquent debts, Applicant has established a more
promising track record for meeting his legal obligations and managing his finances.  MC
7
¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” applies to Applicant’s situation. 
Applicant’s documented tax-filings and payoffs reflect satisfactory progress in
accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing an
applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See  ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan.,
12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct.
29, 2009).
While Applicant has not paid or settled one of his covered creditors (i.e., creditor
1.e), it is a relatively small debt ($52), which Applicant disputes. And it is settled practice
that an applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR to restore his
financial trustworthiness. So long, as Applicant is able to establish a credible and
realistic plan to resolve his financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to
implement the plan, he meets the Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing his
finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reflects some Applicant judgment
lapses in his failing to obtain additional tax-filing extensions and address his small
medical debts earlier in time.  His most recent filing and payment initiatives reflect good-
faith measures to address his tax returns and debts. Overall, Applicant’s corrective
actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a  through 1.e:                  For Applicant
                        Conclusio  n   s   
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
