 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by the Directive, as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-01816
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by the presence of his
family members in India. His request for a position of trust is granted.
Statement of the Case 
On October 7, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for his1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to determine that
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request
for a position of trust.  2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
2
On June 13, 2014, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for foreign influence (Guideline B). Applicant timely3
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August
18, 2014, and I convened a hearing on September 11, 2014. Department Counsel
presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified in his own behalf. 
The Government also asked that I take administrative notice of certain facts
germane to the issues presented by the pleadings. I granted that request and admitted,
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, Department Counsel’s seven-page memorandum, supported
by 14 enclosed documents. DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on
September 19, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s parents (SOR 1.a),
sister (SOR 1.b), and mother- and father-in-law (SOR 1.c) are citizens of and reside in
India. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my
findings of fact. Having reviewed Applicant’s response to the SOR, the transcript, and
exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 41 years old. He was born and raised in India, where he earned
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in computer science. After he graduated from college
in 1993, he was hired by an India-based information technology (IT) company, some of
whose clients were in the United States. In July 1998, Applicant and several co-workers
spent three months in the United States supporting an IT system for one of their clients.
Applicant returned to India, but immigrated permanently to the U.S. from India in May
2001 on a business visa after he was hired by his current U.S.-based employer. He
obtained permanent resident alien status in November 2007, and became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in June 2013. In November 2013, he renounced his foreign citizenship and
passport. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Tr. 30 - 33, 52 - 53)
Applicant’s current employer is an IT company that services automated
information systems for various client companies throughout the United States. He has
relocated several times depending on where his assigned client is located. In June
2013, he was assigned as IT support for systems used by a company that manages
sensitive automated information in the form of personally identifiable information (PII).
Applicant applied for a position of trust in connection with this assignment. Applicant has
a good record in the workplace. Over the past 13 years, he regularly has received
performance-based raises and promotions. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 29 - 30, 36 - 38, 49 - 52)
Applicant and his wife were married in 1999. She is also a native of India who
has been naturalized as a U.S. citizen. She was educated as a mechanical engineer,
 Much of the information contained in Hx. 1 is from the U.S. Department of State web page. Sua sponte, I also4
consulted other sources in the same web page, as well as the CIA Factbook web pages regarding India. 
3
but is now a stay-at-home mother. They have one child, a 12-year-old son, who was
born in the United States. (Gx. 1; Tr. 35)
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father is a retired
transportation worker and his mother has always been a housewife. Applicant’s sister
also is a citizen and resident of India. She is a lecturer in history and journalism at one
of the oldest universities in India. Applicant’s mother- and father-in-law are citizens and
residents of India. He is a retired car salesman, and she has always been a housewife.
None of his relatives in India has any official ties to the government there. (Gx. 2; Tr. 28
- 29, 44 - 46)
Applicant talks to his parents by phone each week. His parents often are more
interested in talking to their grandson than to Applicant. Applicant’s parents have visited
him in the United States about every other year. Applicant also has traveled to India
several times in the past ten years to see his parents and sister. Neither his family nor
his wife’s family are dependent in any way on Applicant or his wife. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 40
- 41)
Applicant has not served in India’s military, and he has not voted in elections
there since immigrating to the United States. He has no foreign financial interests, owns
no property overseas, and does not work for any foreign entity. (Gx. 2)
Based on the information  presented in support of the Government’s4
administrative notice request, I make the following findings of fact:
India and the U.S. have had close relations ever since India obtained its
independence from Great Britain in 1947. The two governments continue to work
closely in pursuit of mutual interests in such issues as international management of
nuclear technology, preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the global war
on terror. Because India is important to strategic U.S. interests in the region, the two
countries have also engaged in several joint military exercises to ensure stability in
southern and southwest Asia. The Indian government buys most of its nuclear
technology from the U.S., and it has an excellent record when it comes to protecting its
nuclear arsenal.
 
India, the world’s most populous democracy, uses a federal form of government,
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain’s parliament, and its members are
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the
U.S. India is included, along with other countries with whom the U.S. has good relations,
on the U.S. State Department’s list of the most active collectors of industrial information
and technology.
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 5
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 6
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 7
 Directive. 6.3.8
4
Since the end of the Cold War, India has been an advocate of issues important to
non-aligned nations, and is a member of the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC). Not only does India enjoy close relations with the U.S., but it is
working to strengthen its ties and advance its mutual interests with France, Israel,
China, Iran, the European Union, Japan, and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
India’s human rights record is uneven. Throughout its history, India’s caste
system, multi-cultural and multi-ethnic population, and the vestiges of colonial
domination have challenged India’s ability to govern certain parts of the country. As a
result of sometimes violent separatist movements, provincial law enforcement
authorities and military militias have used excessive force to maintain order and defeat
domestic terrorism. Although, terrorism and separatist activities are generally done in
furtherance of internal issues, and are most violent in limited and remote geographic
regions, the developing presence of international terrorist organizations is a growing
concern. Despite these problems, India is still an open society in which the rule of law is
prominent.
India, the world’s most populous democracy, uses a federal form of government,
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain’s parliament, and its members are
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the
U.S. India is included, along with other countries with whom the U.S. has good relations,
on the U.S. State Department’s list of the most active collectors of industrial information
and technology.
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I or II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In5
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also6
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.7
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,8
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
5
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Foreign Influence
Applicant’s parents, sister, and his wife’s parents are citizens of India and reside
there. By definition, these are persons to whom Applicant is closely bound by affection.
This is further manifested in Applicant’s frequent phone contact with his family and by
frequent travel for visits with his family. Because India is known to aggressively pursue
economic and technology information from the United States, and owing to the
presence of domestic terrorism there, these relationships reasonably raise
trustworthiness concerns about foreign influence. That concern is articulated at AG ¶ 6,
as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
6
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 7(a):
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
By contrast, the record also requires application of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; and
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.
None of Applicant’s family are associated with the government of India. His and
his wife’s parents are retired and have never had any official association with that
government. It is reasonable to conclude that there is a heightened risk of pressure by
foreign entities when a person has relatives living abroad. However, in this case that
risk is greatly attenuated by the open nature of India’s society, and by the long-standing
close ties between the United States and India. Further, Applicant has firmly established
a life in this country. He affirmatively renounced his foreign citizenship and passport, his
wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and his son is a U.S. citizen by birth here. Applicant’s
entire personal and professional life is in the United States, and he can be counted on
to resolve any conflicting interests consistent with the expectations associated with his
position of trust. I conclude the trustworthiness concerns raised by the Government’s
information have been mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 41-year-old
7
husband and father, who has demonstrated that he is a responsible, mature adult. His
professional career in this country has been successful and he has no financial or
property interests outside of the United States. Although he stays in close and frequent
contact with his family in India, those relationships do not present an unacceptable risk
that Applicant could be forced to compromise the information entrusted to him as part of
his current job. A fair and commonsense assessment of all available information shows
that the trustworthiness concerns raised by the Government’s information are mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:   For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to have access to sensitive automated information. Request for a
position of trust is granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
