 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01551 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 27, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 30, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 30, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 19, 2014. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until August 26, 
2014, to allow Applicant to submit an additional document, which he did. It was marked 
AE C and admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in 1995. He married in 
1998 and has three children ages 17, 12, and 5. He has worked for a government 
contractor since 2006. He has held a security clearance since 2007.2 
 
In July 2013, Applicant was at a friend’s apartment. He was aware his friend 
occasionally used illegal drugs. There were other friends at the apartment for a party. 
Applicant’s wife was also present. For the past ten years he and his friend visited each 
other about once a month, either at Applicant’s house or the friend’s apartment. His 
friend is not married, but cohabitates with his girlfriend, with whom he has a child. His 
friend does not work. He has never seen his friend use illegal drugs, but is aware he 
uses marijuana occasionally.3 
 
While at the party, a marijuana cigarette was passed around and Applicant “took 
a drag” and inhaled the marijuana. He explained he used it because “it was there.”4 He 
stated he only took one puff like it was a cigarette and declined it when it was passed 
around a second time. He was unsure of who supplied the marijuana. Applicant had 
been drinking. He estimated he had 8 to 10 beers, the majority of them before he 
smoked the marijuana and some after. He stated he drinks this amount of alcohol two to 
three times a week. He stated he was immediately remorseful for his actions. His wife 
did not see him smoke the marijuana. He told her about his actions, and she became 
angry.5 
 
In his background interview on January 6, 2014, Applicant indicated that when he 
returned to work after the weekend, he was advised by his supervisor that he was 
selected to take a random urinalysis. He provided the sample and returned to work. A 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a memorandum from Department Counsel indicating he had no objection to the 
exhibit. 
 
2 Tr. 21-22. 
 
3 Tr. 27-30, 42-45. 
 
4 Tr. 34. 
 
5 Tr. 17, 27, 31-35, 45-51. 
 
3 
 
 
couple of days later he was approached by his supervisor who stated that his sample 
had tested positive for marijuana. Applicant then told his supervisor about his use over 
the weekend. The supervisor advised him that their employer was mandating Applicant 
attend a substance-abuse class and his government vehicle driving privileges were 
suspended until he completed the class. He completed the class in July 2013. The class 
lasted one week and included group sessions and one-on-one counseling for a total of 
seven sessions. After completion, his government vehicle driving privileges were 
restored.6 
 
Applicant admitted using marijuana in July 2013 while holding a security 
clearance. He was aware that using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance is 
prohibited. He admitted he made a mistake. At his hearing, he testified that after being 
selected to submit a urine sample for drug testing and before submitting the sample, he 
told his supervisor that he used marijuana over the weekend and his sample would 
probably test positive. He stated the supervisor did not have the test results when he 
told him he used marijuana. This is inconsistent with the statement he provided the 
government investigator. When asked why he did not inform his supervisor of his drug 
use immediately upon returning to work and before being advised he was selected for a 
random test, he stated he was afraid of the potential repercussions and was hoping it 
would not “be brought up.” He stated he would have told his supervisor if he had been 
arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol, but because he was not arrested for 
his drug use he felt he was “home safe.” He stated he would have told his supervisor of 
his drug use even if he had not tested positive. He admitted that despite having 
sufficient time upon his return to work to tell his supervisor, he failed to do so because 
he was afraid of the supervisor’s reaction and what his employer might do.7  
 
Applicant stated that his use of marijuana in July 2013 was the only time in his 
entire life he used it. He stated he never used it in high school. Some of his friends used 
marijuana, and it was around him, but he did not use it. When he used it in July 2013, 
he did not think about the fact it could potentially cost him his job. As soon as he used it 
he felt bad. He has told his 17-year-old son about his use to set an example of why his 
son should not use drugs. Applicant continues to associate with his friend who held the 
party and uses marijuana, but asked that he not have illegal drugs present when 
Applicant is around him. Applicant does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He 
stated he has taken other drug tests since the incident and the results were negative.8  
 
Applicant provided a copy of his 2013 performance evaluation. He is described 
as a dependable and very qualified worker who can be depended on to contribute 100% 
towards any job assignment. He is very good at problem solving and is very supportive 
                                                          
6 Tr. 38-40; GE 2; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. 17-18, 30, 36-38, 42-45, 61-66. 
 
8 Tr. 25-27, 50-52, 56-57. 
 
 
4 
 
 
of team work. He is willing to stay late and work weekends to ensure the project is 
completed. This evaluation noted his violation of the drug-free workplace policy.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
9 AE C. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying conditions for drug involvement 
under AG ¶ 25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
 (b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana in July 2013. He tested positive during a random 
urinalysis. He held a security clearance when he used marijuana. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant stated he only used marijuana once in his life. Regardless of how many 
times he may or may not have used illegal drugs, the fact remains that Applicant was 
aware of the special trust he was given when he was granted a security clearance, a 
 
6 
 
 
trust he violated. Applicant did not immediately report his conduct to his security 
manager before being made aware that he was to submit to a urinalysis. He only made 
his supervisor aware of his drug use after he was aware his test results would likely be 
positive for marijuana use. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant continues to associate with his friend who held the party and uses 
marijuana. Applicant credibly testified that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future. It has been a year since he used marijuana. AG ¶ 26 (b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He has held a security clearance since 2007. The 
Government requires people it entrusts with security clearances to do the right thing 
even when no one is looking, regardless of the repercussions. Applicant violated that 
trust when he used marijuana at a party where he was binge drinking. He did not report 
his marijuana use until he was aware that he would likely test positive on a random 
urinalysis. He indicated his intent to refrain from marijuana use in the future. Applicant 
was beyond the age of youthful indiscretion when he used marijuana as an adult, a 
father, and a trusted employee. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
