1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-00383
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 31-year-old engineer technician, Applicant
has a history of criminal conduct during 2004–2012 consisting of driving while her
driver’s license was suspended in her state of residence. She resolved those matters
about two years ago by paying the necessary fines and she obtained a valid driver’s
license. But she has an outstanding arrest warrant for similar conduct in 2009 in another
state, and that matter is unresolved. She also has a history of financial problems or
difficulties that are unresolved and ongoing. She did not present sufficient evidence to
explain and mitigate the criminal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On April 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a statement
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit H. 2
 Exhibits D, E, F, and H.  3
2
national interest to grant or continue access to classified information.  The SOR is1
similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security
guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations, Guideline E fo personal
conduct, and Guideline J for criminal conduct.     
The case was assigned to me August 11, 2014, to conduct the hearing requested
by Applicant. The hearing was held as scheduled on August 26, 2014. At the hearing,
Department Counsel presented Exhibits 1–5, which were admitted. Applicant testified,
called no other witnesses, and did not offer any documentary evidence. The transcript
(Tr.) was received September 4, 2014.
The record was kept open until September 9, 2014, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to present documentary evidence. Those matters were timely submitted and
are made part of the record as Exhibits A–H. In particular, Exhibits A, B, and C are IRS
Records of Account for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012; and Exhibits D, E, F, G, and H
are letters of recommendation. 
  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a federal contractor who is seeking a
security clearance for the first time. She completed high school and has some college,
but has not earned a degree. She has never married; she has a three-year-old son;
and the child’s father is deceased, a victim of a shooting before the child was born. On
her son’s behalf, Applicant receives a Social Security payment of about $600 monthly,
which she uses to pay for daycare and other childcare expenses. 
She is employed as an engineer technician who is responsible for testing
communications equipment used by the military. She has held this job since January
2013, and it is a part-time, on-call position. She has a good record of employment
according to a favorable letter of recommendation from her current supervisor.  In2
addition to her supervisor, four other people submitted favorable letters of
recommendation on her behalf.  3
 Exhibits 1, 3, and 5.  4
 Exhibit 1; Tr. 85–86. 5
 Tr. 39–43. 6
 Exhibits 2, 3, and 4. 7
3
The SOR alleges and there is substantial evidence to show that Applicant has a
history of criminal conduct.  In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five incidents4
where she was cited or arrested for driving while her driver’s license was suspended.
The incidents occurred in 2004, twice in 2008, 2009, and 2012. In addition, she
disclosed the four incidents that took place in her state of residence when she
completed her security clearance application, but she did not disclose the fifth incident
that took place in 2009 in another state because she forgot about it.  5
Applicant explained that her driver’s license was initially suspended because of
failure to pay fines for traffic offenses. She resolved this matter in 2012, except for the
2009 incident, when her state of residence issued her a driver’s license after she paid
about $2,000 in fines and attended traffic schools and classes.6
In 2009, Applicant was driving in another state when she was stopped for driving
without wearing a seatbelt. The police discovered that her driver’s license was
suspended and she was arrested. According to Applicant, a search of the car found a
set of brass knuckles, which she attributed to a passenger in the car. The police
released Applicant on her own recognizance, she never appeared in court or retained
an attorney to address the matter, and there is an outstanding arrest warrant for her.
Since having this matter brought to her attention during the security clearance process,
Applicant has taken no action to resolve the outstanding arrest warrant. 
The SOR alleges and there is substantial evidence to show that Applicant has a
history of financial problems or difficulties that are unresolved and ongoing.  That history7
consists of the following: (1) $24,404 in collection or charged-off accounts; (2) $2,000 in
delinquent debt for a broken apartment lease; (3) $6,721 in medical collection accounts;
(4) failure to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012;
and (5) failure to timely file state income tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012.
The medical collection accounts resulted from necessary medical expenses incurred by
Applicant without the benefit of health insurance. 
Although Applicant stated that she has made some payments, she presented no
documentation showing proof of payment, and she admitted that all the accounts
alleged in the SOR are unresolved. She has filed federal income tax returns for tax
years 2010, 2011, and 2012; the 2010 return was filed in May 2014, the 2011 return
was filed in April 2014, and the 2012 return was filed in March 2013; and there are zero
 Exhibits A, B, and C. 8
 Tr. 82–85. 9
 Tr. 81–82.10
 Exhibit 1. 11
 Tr. 39. 12
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to13
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
4
balances for those three tax years.  She claimed she filed state income tax returns as8
well, but she did not present any documentation to verify her claim. 
Applicant retained the services of a credit repair firm about four months ago, but
that process has not produced results at this time. Applicant stated that she had about
$20 in her checking account, nothing in savings, and was relying on her son’s Social
Security payment because she had just returned to work after a short layoff.  At present,9
Applicant is weighing her options, including bankruptcy, in order to determine a course
of action to address her delinquent debts.10
Applicant completed a security clearance application (also known as an e-QIP) in
June 2013.  She stated that “the e-QIP was really confusing. It took forever to11
[complete] it.”  In completing the form, she disclosed four criminal incidents that12
occurred in her state of residence and she disclosed a vehicle repossession (which is
alleged SOR ¶ 1.c). In response to questions calling for such information, she did not
disclose an incident of criminal conduct in 2009 in another state; she did not disclose
the various delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c through 1.v; and she did not
disclose her failure to file federal and state income tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012.
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As13
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt14
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 21
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).22
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.23
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 24
5
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  16
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting17
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An18
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate19
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme20
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.21
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.22
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it23
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that criminal activity24
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations. In this
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 25
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant26
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  27
6
case, Applicant has a well-established track record of offenses for driving while her
driver’s license was suspended during the period 2004–2012. And for the 2009 incident,
an arrest warrant was issued and is still outstanding. Those facts and circumstances are
sufficient to raise a concern under the following disqualifying conditions:
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted.
  Guideline J also contains conditions that may mitigate security concerns. The
most pertinent here is:
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 32(d) because she successfully
resolved her problematic driving record in her state of residence in 2012 by paying the
fines, attending traffic schools, and obtaining a valid driver’s license. But the credit in
mitigation is partial because she has yet to resolve the 2009 incident in another state. It
should be obvious but it is nonetheless stated here that any applicant who has an
outstanding arrest warrant is not a good candidate for a security clearance. For that
reason, the Guideline J concern is decided against Applicant.
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant25
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 26
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  27
 AG ¶ 19(a).  28
 AG ¶ 19(c). 29
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–(f). 30
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 31
7
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. Taken together, the collection and charged-off accounts, the
delinquent account stemming from the broken apartment lease, and the failure to timely
file state and federal income tax returns indicate inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of28 29
Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions, and
the facts also suggest a degree of financial irresponsibility.
With that said, I attach little security significance to the eight medical accounts in
collection for a total of about $6,721. Applicant incurred those debts for necessary
medical care without the luxury of health insurance as opposed to high-living or frivolous
expenditures, and they do not indicate poor self-control, questionable judgment,
unreliability, or untrustworthiness. On that basis, the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.k,
1.m, 1.n, 1.p, and 1.s are decided for Applicant.   
 In mitigation, Applicant has filed federal income tax returns for the three years in
question and there are no balances due. On that basis, the failure to file is mitigated.
The same cannot be said for the failure to file state income tax returns for the three
years in question. Applicant did not present any documentation to verify her claim that
she has in fact filed the returns, and given the circumstances here, I cannot simply take
her word for it. As for the other matters (e.g., the collection and charged-off accounts),
none of the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F are sufficient to fully mitigate the
concern stemming from her delinquent debts.  Applicant is facing a small mountain of30
debt with few financial resources. Understandably, she is weighing her options, trying to
make the best decision for her family, but there is no indication of any type of realistic
plan to address her delinquent debts.  
Of course, the purpose of this case is not aimed at collecting debts.  Rather, the31
purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, the
Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 32
 AG ¶ 15. 33
 Id.34
8
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.32
Here, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the concern. 
Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information.”  In addition to those general matters, a33
particular concern is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers.  A statement is34
false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and
material information is not deliberate if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about
it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the
information did not need to be reported.
Here, the SOR alleges that Applicant falsified her June 2013 security clearance
application (the e-QIP) by failing to disclose the incident of criminal conduct in 2009; the
various delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c through 1.v; and her failure to file
federal and state income tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012. I am not persuaded that
Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed, or falsified material facts when answering the
relevant questions for two reasons. First, she disclosed other adverse information,
criminal and financial, which undercuts any effort to hide or conceal her unfavorable
background. Second, after having an opportunity to observe and listen to Applicant
during the hearing, my view is that she has an unsophisticated understanding of her tax
obligations and financial matters in general. Given these circumstances, I am not
persuaded that she was endeavoring to hide or misrepresent her unfavorable criminal
or financial record. 
Applicant’s outstanding arrest warrant and problematic financial history raise
doubt about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Following Egan and the
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).35
9
clearly-consistent standard, I resolve that doubt in favor of protecting national security.
In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept.  In doing so, I considered Applicant’s35
favorable evidence. Nonetheless, the favorable matters are not enough to justify a
conclusion that she met her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d–1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.h–1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m–1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.q–1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.t–1.v: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c: For Applicant 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 3.a, 3.c, 3.d, 3.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
