 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00141 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 22, 2010, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on October 26, 2010. A complete copy of the file of 
 
2 
 
relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received a copy of the FORM on November 7, 2010. As of 
December 13, 2010, he had not responded. The Government Exhibits (GE) included in 
the FORM are admitted. The documents attached to Applicant’s response to the SOR 
are also admitted. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He has worked for his current employer since 
February 2009. He has attended college since 1999, but he has not obtained a degree. 
He married in 2007 and divorced in 2009. He does not have children.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $32,000. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR. He also submitted additional 
evidence in support of his application for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant had gastric bypass surgery in 2007. The surgery cost about $22,000 to 
$23,000 and was not covered by medical insurance. Applicant was on disability for 
about five to six months following the surgery, and his income was substantially 
reduced. He was unable to pay all his bills. It appears that he had high balances on a 
number of accounts, but they only became delinquent after the surgery. He paid the 
majority of the medical bills from the surgery, but several of the bills have not yet been 
paid. Seven of the debts listed in the SOR, totaling $3,246, are medical debts.2 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, which alleged that he owed $9,948 to a credit 
card company. The amount was based upon a September 2009 credit report. Applicant 
was interviewed for his background investigation in October 2009. He discussed his 
surgery, his delinquent debts, and the steps he was taking to resolve his financial 
problems. He told the investigator that he was served with court papers by the creditor 
from SOR ¶ 1.a. He stated that they settled the lawsuit with his agreement to pay $150 
in October 2009, followed by monthly payments of $500. When he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories in June 2010, he submitted a December 2009 letter from the credit card 
company reflecting a $500 payment in December 2009 and a balance of $8,300. 
Applicant also submitted a February 2010 letter he wrote to the credit card company 
requesting validation of the debt. The credit card company responded in March 2010. 
There is no evidence of any additional payments. Credit reports from May, June, and 
October 2010 report a balance of $8,300 on the debt.3 
 
                                                          
1 GE 4.  
 
2 GE 7.  
 
3 GE 3-8.  
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant entered into an agreement with a collection company to settle a $6,359 
debt originally owed to a bank, with four monthly payments of $761. This debt was 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. The first payment was due on September 30, 2010, after Applicant 
responded to the SOR. He did not respond to the FORM, so it is unclear if he made the 
required payments.4 
 
 In addition to the medical bills from his surgery, Applicant paid or settled several 
debts that were not listed on the SOR, including two debts totaling more than $8,000. 
Applicant stated that he has learned from his mistakes. He is living within his means, 
not accumulating additional debt, and has funds left over to pay his delinquent debts. 
He stated that he intends to systematically pay all the debts in the SOR. He plans to 
purchase a home after he has resolved his debts. He pays cash for his purchases and 
does not intend to get in over his head with credit card debt again. There is no evidence 
that he has received financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
4 GE 3.  
 
5 GE 3-8.  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved any of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant had gastric bypass surgery in 2007. The surgery cost about $22,000 to 
$23,000 and was not covered by medical insurance. Applicant was on disability for 
about five to six months following the surgery, and he lost most of his income. 
Applicant’s surgery may not have been covered by insurance, but it should not be 
viewed in the same category as cosmetic surgery. It provides a viable means to address 
a potentially life-threatening health issue. I find that the costs associated with 
Applicant’s surgery and his period on disability resulted from events that were largely 
beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had high balances on his accounts 
before the surgery, but they did not become delinquent until after the surgery. He paid 
most of the medical expenses from the surgery, and he paid several debts that were not 
alleged in the SOR. He stated that he intends to pay all the debts in the SOR. He stated 
that he settled a lawsuit brought by one creditor with an agreement to pay $500 each 
month. He established that he paid $500 in December 2009, and he may have made 
additional payments before then. There is no evidence that he made any payments after 
December 2009. He has a settlement agreement to pay another debt, but there is no 
evidence that he made the required payments. I find that Applicant warrants credit for 
some mitigation under 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d). However, other than the $500 payment 
made in December 2009, Applicant has not submitted proof of payments on any of the 
debts in the SOR. After considering Applicant’s financial history as well as the amount 
of debts yet to be resolved, there is insufficient evidence for a determination that 
Applicant’s financial problems are sufficiently in order to alleviate security concerns. In 
sum, I conclude that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. The limited information in the record 
has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a 
security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
