 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04438 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 13, 2015, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on September 12, 2016. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 1, 2016. He 
responded to the FORM with a letter that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The 
case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM and AE A are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
2 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and the request is granted. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of 
particular note is that the risk of terrorist activities in Afghanistan remains extremely 
high. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence, and the potential 
exists throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, against U.S. 
and other Western nationals at any time. The country’s human rights record remains 
poor.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in 
Afghanistan to Afghan parents. He spent part of his youth with his family in Pakistan as 
refugees during the conflict with the Soviet Union. His family returned to Afghanistan 
where Applicant attended a medical university. He worked with the U.S. military in 
Afghanistan as a linguist for a defense contractor from 2005 to 2007. Because of his 
work with the military, he was eligible for a special immigrant visa. He immigrated to the 
United States in 2007, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2013.1 
 
 Applicant has eight siblings. His parents, six of his siblings, and some extended 
family members are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Two of his siblings are 
citizens and residents of Canada. His parents are in their 70s. His father worked for the 
Afghan government for about ten years. He left that job more than 30 years ago.2 
 
 Applicant married an Afghan citizen in Afghanistan before they immigrated to the 
United States. They have two children. Their older child was born in Afghanistan, and 
their younger child was born in the United States. Applicant’s wife is now a U.S. citizen. 
They separated in 2013 after a domestic incident. Their current status is unknown.3 
 
 Applicant returned to Afghanistan in 2010 as a linguist for a defense contractor. 
He worked in Afghanistan until 2012, when he returned to the United States. He 
returned to Afghanistan again in 2014 to work as a linguist for a defense contractor. It is 
unclear how long he remained in Afghanistan, but he was either still in Afghanistan or 
had returned when he responded to the FORM in October 2016.4 
 
 Applicant periodically contacts his family in Afghanistan when he is in the United 
States. He sometimes sends money to his father via Western Union. None of his family 
members currently have any direct connection to the government of Afghanistan.5 
                                                          
1 Items 4-7, 9. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-7, 9; AE A. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-7, 9. 
 
4 Items 2, 4, 5. 
 
5 Items 2, 5; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that he would immediately report any contact by a foreign 
government, intelligence or security service, or terrorist organization, or any attempt to 
blackmail or coerce him. He received a certificate of appreciation for his “dedicated work 
in support of the efforts of the United States Military.”6 He professed his undivided 
loyalty to the United States: 
 
My loyalty to the flag of The United States of America is beyond 
questioning. Certainly working in Afghanistan alongside [the] world’s best 
Army is not free of danger and possible loss [of] life. But the pride and 
dignity of being an American is much higher than thinking of dangers. My 
love and commitment to the flag and people of the United States is 
undivided and eternal. During all these years of working and living with our 
elite military personnel, I have learned to respect, appreciate, and serve in 
the best way possible.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 Items 6-8. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
5 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s parents, six of his siblings, and some extended family members are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His father worked for the Afghan government 
more than 30 years ago. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and 
citizens remains extremely high in Afghanistan, and it continues to have human rights 
problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.8  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
6 
 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He stated that he would immediately 
report any contact by a foreign government, intelligence or security service, or terrorist 
organization, or any attempt to blackmail or coerce him. The Appeal Board has stated 
that such a statement, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is record 
evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in comparable 
circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of complying with 
security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.9 In 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Afghanistan earned him a special 
immigrant visa. He returned to Afghanistan several times since his immigration to work 
with the U.S. military. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”10 The complicated state of affairs in 
Afghanistan places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that 
his foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that 
burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
