1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:  
 
        ----------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05623 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
and mitigate the security concerns stemming from his personal conduct and foreign 
influence. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his 
circumstances raised security concerns under the personal conduct and foreign influence 
guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 2016, and requested a 
hearing to establish his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
  
 On February 5, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified at the hearing and called one combination fact and character witness 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
to testify on his behalf. The Government offered five exhibits, which were marked for 
identification as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and which were admitted without 
objection. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on February 13, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”2 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.3 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DOD policy and standards).4 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were in effect at the time. My decision and formal 
findings under the revised Guidelines E and B would not be different under the 2006 
Guidelines E and B.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. He is a high school graduate with some college credits. 
He was married the first time in 1997 and divorced in 2002. He married his second wife 
in May 2005. Applicant has three children, two daughters ages 16 and 18, and a son age 
6 who lives with Applicant and his wife. From March 1989 to November 1995, Applicant 
served as an Active Reservist in the Army National Guard. Between November 1995 and 
July 2001, Applicant was on active duty in the U.S. Army until he was honorably 
discharged. Since November 2001, he has been employed by a NATO support agency 
as a munitions expert.5 
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant: (1) had an affair with a Russian 
national from October 2013 to December 2013; (2) failed to timely report his contact with 
a Russian citizen to his security office, as required, and did not report that contact until 
October 23, 2014, when the Russian national threatened him; and (3) during a May 16, 
2014, background interview only disclosed that the Russian national was a university 
classmate but not that he had an affair with her.  
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
5 GE 1. Tr. 26, 30. 
 
3 
 
 
Under Guideline B, the SOR alleged that: (1) Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-
law, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Albania and that his father-in-law is a 
retired Albanian army officer currently teaching at the Albanian military academy; and (2) 
a family friend is a citizen of Albania, a resident of Germany, and is the Albanian 
ambassador to Germany.6  
 
Under Guideline E, Applicant admitted the “affair” but “only as far as that term . . 
.can include casual relationships not based upon commitment.” He denied that he failed 
to timely report his Russian contact until October 2014. Applicant claimed that in January 
2014 he reported this contact to the U.S representative at his NATO agency and to his 
security officer. He also claimed that the procedures to report this contact were unclear 
to him in that the relationship was not professionally related, the contact was not working 
for a foreign government, and was not asking questions about Applicant’s job. When the 
Russian national contacted Applicant in October 2014, Applicant reported that to his 
security officer. Applicant admitted that he did not report the affair during his background 
interview, but he did report his “impression of the primary nature of the relationship” and 
that “it was not [his] intention to misrepresent the relationship.”  
 
Under Guideline B, Applicant admitted that his mother-in-law and father-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Albania, but that his father-in-law has retired from his position as 
a professor. Applicant claimed that his sister-in-law is now a naturalized United States 
citizen residing in the United States. Applicant admitted that a family friend is an Albanian 
citizen serving as the Albanian ambassador to Germany, but that since his friend’s arrival 
in Germany several years ago, contact has been minimal.7  
 
At hearing, Applicant testified about his relationship with the Russian national. In 
the summer of 2013, Applicant enrolled in a professional enrichment program run by a 
prestigious U. S. university. In August 2013, just after enrolling, Applicant filed for divorce, 
because he believed his wife had been unfaithful. The enrichment program consisted of 
intensive, week-long sessions with the first one being held at the campus of the 
sponsoring university. Thereafter, the sessions were held at satellite cities in Europe, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, and Asia. The professors for each session and the students 
traveled to those cities to attend. Applicant described the program as having “an 
international cohort,” meaning that students from other countries participated.8 
 
 It was at the initial session in June or July 2013 that Applicant met the Russian 
national, who was also enrolled as a student. Thereafter, Applicant and the Russian 
national met while attending classes, and on two occasions, when Applicant was on 
personal or business travel. They met about seven times monthly during the course of 
their relationship, from about June or July 2013 to December 2013. Applicant broke off 
                                                          
6 SOR ¶¶ 1 and 2. The Government did not offer at the hearing an Administrative Notice for Albania.  
 
7 Answer ¶¶ 1 and 2.  
 
8 Tr. 32.  
4 
 
the relationship in December 2013 in order to reunite with his wife, and in January 2014 
he instructed his attorney to cancel the divorce proceedings. At about the same time, he 
informed his wife about his affair.9 
Applicant testified that sometime in January 2014 “not knowing the right action in 
this case, [he] sought guidance from [his agency’s] U.S. representative after confessing . 
. . [his] physical involvement with the Russian national.” He was advised to report the 
matter to his local security office. Applicant called the U.S. representative to Applicant’s 
agency as a witness.10 The witness confirmed that Applicant did report his relationship in 
January 2014. At that time, Applicant’s contact with the Russian national had been 
completely cut off. Applicant went immediately to the security office and reported the 
relationship to his security officer. At that time, Applicant did not know the woman’s 
whereabouts. Thereafter, until October 2014, Applicant received only two emails from the 
Russian, which he did not answer. In October 2014, Applicant received an email from the 
Russian advising that she was planning to move to the city where Applicant worked. 
Applicant viewed that email as a threat. He immediately reported that message to his 
security officer.11 
In November 2001, Applicant signed a “Security Declaration” required by his 
agency certifying that he understood and would comply with regulations concerning 
security. One of those regulations stated: “Any [agency] employee who, in his/her social 
contacts with persons from outside the Agency, believes himself/herself to be in contact 
with representatives of organisations or groups, or with a citizen of a nation that may hold 
opposing aims to those of NATO, is required to inform their Security Officer without 
delay.”12  
 In March 2014, Applicant submitted his security clearance application. As noted 
below, he responded “No” to the question whether he had any contacts with a foreign 
national with whom he is “bound by affection, influence, common interests, and/or 
obligation.”13 The summary of the May 16, 2014, background interview, upon which SOR 
¶ 1.c is based, is not in evidence. In April 2015, Applicant submitted an addendum to his 
security clearance application, fully describing his affair with a Russian national. He also 
                                                          
9 Tr. 22-23, 31-32, 34-38. Applicant characterized the relationship as “only…one of a physical nature” not 
one that “held any commitment.” Tr. 23-24. In Applicant’s March 28, 2014 security clearance application, 
he responded “No” to the question whether he had any contacts with a foreign national with whom he is 
“bound by affection, influence, common interests, and/or obligation.” GE 1. By the time he answered this 
question, Applicant had ended the affair and reunited with his wife. 
  
10 The U.S. representative’s office is an extension of the office of the U.S. Ambassador to NATO. One of 
his responsibilities is dealing with the administration of U.S. personnel. That includes dealing with security 
clearances. Tr. 41-42.  
 
11 Tr. 24-25, 34-36, 44. That email resulted in a JPAS incident report and a memorandum by the security 
officer. GE 4; GE 5. There is nothing in the record that explains why Applicant’s first report of his contact, 
in January 2014, did not result in a JPAS incident report.  
12 GE 5. 
 
13 GE 1. 
   
5 
 
stated that he and his wife have remained together due to support from friends, family, 
and couple’s therapy.14 
Applicant testified about his Albanian in-laws. His mother-in-law and father-in-law 
are both still alive, and his father-in-law just celebrated his 70th birthday. His mother-in-
law is 64 and does not work outside the home. When asked about his current relationship 
with his in-laws, Applicant said that he “has no idea what they say to me, because [he] 
does not speak Albanian . . . and they don’t speak English.” They are pleasant, they love 
their daughter, and Applicant’s son. Applicant and his family see his in-laws on average 
about four times a year, sometimes at holidays, such as Christmas.15  
The U.S representative testified as to Applicant’s character. The witness has 
known Applicant for 11 years and interacts with him at least weekly and sometimes daily, 
if there are U.S. visitors who require Applicant’s presence. Applicant was “forthcoming 
and cooperative” in connection with reporting his relationship with the Russian national. 
The witness characterized Applicant as “well-respected, and a “very stellar” subject-
matter expert. He believes Applicant is “capable of holding a . . . security clearance” and 
that he “handles and values . . . secret material in the manner which it’s supposed to be 
handled.” The witness does not consider Applicant to be a security risk.16 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
                                                          
14 GE 5. In GE 5 Applicant stated that his relationship with the Russian national began in October 2013 
and continued through the end of the year. That is somewhat inconsistent with Applicant’s testimony that 
they first met in June or July 2013. Tr. 32. When asked directly how long his affair with the Russian 
lasted, Applicant responded “it basically went on during the last three months of 2013.” Tr. 37-38. The 
explanation is likely that the romantic aspect of the relationship occurred during the last three months of 
2013.  
 
15 Tr. 36-37. GE 1.  
   
16 Tr. 47-52.  
6 
 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 sets out the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.17 
 
 AG ¶¶ 16(a) through (c) set forth below are potentially disqualifying conditions that 
may apply to the conduct alleged under Guideline E: 
 
a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
                                                          
17 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
7 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative;   
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(a), (c), and (d) set forth below are potentially mitigating conditions that 
may apply to the conduct alleged under Guideline E: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
Under Guideline E, the Government’s case is basically two-fold. First, Applicant 
had an affair with a Russian national and failed to timely report it. Second, in his May 
2014 background interview, although Applicant disclosed his contact with a Russian 
national in a university project, he did not disclose that he had an affair with her.  
 
Applicant admitted that he had an affair with a Russian national but qualified his 
admission that the relationship was only “casual and not based upon commitment.” An 
8 
 
admitted extra-marital affair raises a security concern under AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (e).18 The 
evidence adduced at the hearing, however, does not support the SOR’s allegation that 
Applicant failed to report his contact until October 2014. Applicant, in fact, reported his 
contact to his U.S. representative and to his security officer in January 2014, after he had 
broken off his relationship in December 2013.  
 
A narrower question is whether Applicant reported his contact “as required,” as 
alleged in the SOR. The SOR did not state what “as required” meant. Nor did the 
Government at the hearing argue that Applicant’s reporting to his U.S. representative and 
his security officer in January 2014 was insufficient or noncompliant. Applicant’s security 
officer made no JPAS entry reflecting Applicant’s January 2014 report, so it is fair to 
assume that the security officer did not deem Applicant’s report to be insufficient or 
noncompliant. There is, however, the security regulation quoted above, which could 
inform the “as required” allegation: 
 
“Any [agency] employee who, in his/her social contacts with persons from outside the 
Agency, believes himself/herself to be in contact with representatives of organisations or 
groups, or with a citizen of a nation that may hold opposing aims to those of NATO, is 
required to inform their Security Officer without delay (emphasis added).”  
 
 As noted, when Applicant took his employment with the agency in November 2001, 
he signed a declaration that he would comply with all security regulations. Giving 
Applicant the benefit of the doubt that the romantic aspect of his relationship with the 
Russian national did not evolve until October 2013, it could be argued that he should have 
reported his relationship between October 2013 and December 2013, when he broke off 
the relationship, that is, well before January 2014. An earlier report would have satisfied 
the “without delay” requirement. There is nothing in the record, however, showing that 
Applicant in the last three months of 2013 was aware of this regulation. In fact, Applicant 
testified that he contacted the U.S. representative in January 2014, because he wanted 
guidance on how to proceed in light of the then broken-off relationship with the Russian 
national. I conclude that Applicant did not know of (or remember) the reporting regulation 
and, therefore, did not intentionally violate it. Nonetheless, his belated reporting was a 
technical violation of that regulation triggering AG ¶ 16(c). The next inquiry is whether any 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 In the summer of 2013, Applicant decided to enroll in a professional enrichment 
program that would take him to foreign venues, where he would study with students from 
other countries. At about the same time, Applicant filed for a divorce believing that his 
wife had been unfaithful. During the first session of the enrichment program, in June or 
July 2013, Applicant met a Russian national who was also a student in the program. By 
about October 2013, Applicant’s relationship with the Russian national evolved into a 
romantic one. Thereafter, they met about seven times either during the program’s weekly 
sessions or on perhaps two occasions during Applicant’s personal or professional travels. 
In December 2013, Applicant ended the relationship and returned to his wife.   
 
                                                          
18 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-16240 (Oct. 1, 2008).  
9 
 
  In January 2014, Applicant told his wife about his affair. At the same time, he 
instructed his lawyer to cancel the divorce proceedings.  He also, again at about the same 
time, reported his affair to his agency’s U.S. representative and to his security officer. He 
and his wife went through couples therapy, and they remain together to this day. The 
conduct giving rise to this case took place over four years ago. The circumstances recited 
above are unique, are unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. In addition, Applicant has acknowledged his behavior 
and has obtained counseling to address it.  Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) 
apply.  
 
 That brings us to the SOR allegation that in his May 2014 background interview, 
although Applicant disclosed his contact with a Russian national in a university project, 
he deliberately failed to disclose that he had an affair with her. Applicant admitted that he 
did not disclose the romantic nature of the relationship but that he “reported the primary 
nature of the relationship,” and that “it was not [his] intention to misrepresent the 
relationship.” That qualified answer as to his intention is a denial, which shifts the burden 
to the Government to prove a deliberate failure to disclose. In assessing an allegation of 
deliberate falsification, I consider not only the allegation and applicant’s answer but all 
relevant circumstances. Of particular significance here is the summary report of the 
background interview. That report, however, is not in evidence. I am, therefore, unable to 
assess the context of the exchange between the investigator and Applicant, and I am 
unable to review the actual words the investigator attributed to Applicant. On this record, 
I am reluctant to find a deliberate failure to disclose. Indeed, to make such a finding on 
this record may very likely be reversible error. Without more from the Government, it has 
not carried its burden.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence  
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. 
interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the country 
in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes one condition that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 
7. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
10 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect classified 
or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information or technology.  
 
The guideline also notes several conditions in AG ¶ 8 that could mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with the foreign citizen is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with his mother-in-law and father-in-law, who are citizens 
and residents of Albania, raises a security concern under AG ¶ 7(b).19 The question is 
whether that concern is mitigated.  
 
Applicant’s in-laws are ages 64 and 70, respectively. Applicant’s father-in-law, a 
former professor at the Albanian military academy, is now retired. Applicant correctly 
noted in his answer that Albania is a member of NATO. Applicant’s mother-in-law does 
not work outside of the home. Because Applicant does not speak Albanian, and his in-
laws do not speak English, he and they cannot communicate directly. Applicant and his 
family see his in-laws about four times a year. Applicant has worked for a U.S. support 
agency for NATO since 2011 and has served honorably in the U.S. Army and the Army 
National Guard. It is unlikely that under these circumstances Applicant would be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of his in-laws and the interests of 
the United States. In addition, Applicant has such a deep and longstanding relationship 
and loyalties to the United States that he would resolve any conflict in favor of the United 
States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply.  
 
Applicant’s contact with his friend who is the Albanian Ambassador to Germany 
has been minimal. AG ¶ 8(c) applies.  
 
                                                          
19 Applicant’s sister-in-law is now a U.S. citizen residing in the United States. That former security concern 
is now moot.  
11 
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.20 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):                For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                  For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)                  For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 2.a-2b:                                                 For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.   
 
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
20 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9). I took into positive account the U.S. representative’s favorable character testimony on 
behalf of Applicant.  
 
