 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03544 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances 
beyond her control. Nevertheless, her evidence is insufficient to establish a track record 
of financial responsibility, or that her financial problems are resolved or are under 
control. Financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 12, 
2013. She was interviewed by a government investigator on March 22, 2013. After 
reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) on November 4, 2016, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on November 30, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge 
from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on June 13, 2017, and issued a notice of hearing 
on June 26, 2017, setting the hearing for July 12, 2017. At the hearing, the Government 
offered nine exhibits (GE 1 through 9), which were admitted as evidence without 
 
2 
 
 
objections. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted no exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR financial considerations allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d 
through 1.f. She denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, and 1.h. She failed to 
admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.ff. I have considered all of those 
allegations denied. Her admissions to the SOR allegations and at her hearing are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a federal contractor. After graduating from 
high school, she attended college and earned an associate’s degree in 1998. Applicant 
married in 1995 and divorced in 1998. She married her husband in April 2000. She has 
four children, ages 16, 15, 10, and 5. One of her daughters suffers from significant 
health issues and requires frequent medical attention. Applicant had another child that 
passed away shortly after birth in 2004. 
 
Applicant started working for federal contractors in 1999, and shortly thereafter 
she was issued a security clearance. She has held her clearance for most of the 18 
years she has worked for federal contractors. Applicant’s work history revealed 
numerous periods of unemployment. She worked full time between February 2002 and 
July 2004; was unemployed between July 2004 and April 2005 (maternity leave, her 
daughter passing, and losing her job); employed between April 2005 and March 2007; 
and unemployed between March 2007 and May 2007. (GE 1) 
 
Applicant was employed between May 2007 and March 2010; unemployed 
between March 2010 and July 2010; employed between July 2010 and May 2011; 
unemployed between May 2011 and July 2011; employed between July 2011 and 
January 2012; unemployed between January 2012 and April 2012; and employed 
between April 2012 and July 2015. Applicant was unemployed between July 2015 and 
January 2016 (could not find a job); employed between January 2016 and January 
2017; and unemployed between January 2017 and May 2017. Her current employer, a 
federal contractor, hired Applicant in May 2017. (GE 1, Tr. 23-32) 
 
Applicant disclosed on Section 26 (Financial Record) of her 2013 SCA that she 
had financial problems, which included: delinquent judgments, delinquent or in 
collection accounts, and garnishment of wages. The background investigation revealed 
that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2004 and was discharged of 
all dischargeable financial obligations. Following the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
accumulated the 31 delinquent or in collection accounts alleged in the SOR. They 
include seven judgments, 22 delinquent medical services accounts (ranging from $100 
to $1,140), and two utility delinquent accounts, all of which total approximately $35,000. 
The accounts alleged in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions and the 
credit reports in evidence.  
 
3 
 
 
A government investigator confronted Applicant about her financial problems 
during a March 2013 interview. She indicated that the 2004 bankruptcy filing was a 
result of her periods of unemployment and the loss of her daughter. During the 
interview, Applicant acknowledged and agreed with substantially the same debts 
alleged in the SOR. At the time of the interview, she was confronted with 10 judgments, 
five delinquent medical accounts, and 55 delinquent or in collection accounts, ranging 
from $42 to $8,116. Applicant told the investigator she was trying to save enough 
money to start paying her delinquent accounts. 
 
At hearing, and during her 2013 interview, Applicant explained that most of her 
delinquent accounts resulted from circumstances beyond her control, which included: 
she being the sole family provider, extensive periods of unemployment, her and her 
family’s medical problems, her spouse’s medical disability and inability to work, and the 
death of a child. Because of her lack of income, she did not have the financial resources 
to pay the family’s living expenses and her delinquent debts. She noted that her 
husband had two surgeries in 2016, and was in the hospital twice during 2017. Her 
daughter was in the hospital three times in 2017. 
 
Applicant testified that whenever she was employed she held medical insurance. 
She believes that many of her medical debts should have been paid by her insurance 
companies. Because her husband was constantly in and out of the hospital, and she 
had to work and take care of him and the children, she was disorganized and many of 
the medical bills were not submitted to the insurance companies. Applicant averred she 
was in the process of reviewing her credit reports to determine which medical bills 
needed to be referred to the insurance companies for payment. She received the SOR 
in November 2016. As of her hearing in July 2017, she presented no evidence of any 
contacts with insurance companies, payment of any medical debts, disputes, or of other 
resolution of any of the medical delinquent accounts. 
 
At her hearing, Applicant noted that she was behind on paying some of her 
utilities bills. She testified that she just started to get steady paychecks the month before 
her hearing and was working on getting caught up first, and then she was planning to 
address her delinquent accounts. She repeatedly testified that it has always been her 
intention to repay her delinquent accounts. Applicant also clearly noted that to her, it 
was a matter of priorities, and feeding and taking care of her children is always a priority 
before any other financial obligations.  
 
Applicant testified she was in the process of analyzing her credit reports to 
determine what accounts were her legal obligation to pay. After making that 
assessment, she was planning on contacting the creditors to make payment 
arrangements. She repeatedly stated her belief that she not being financially 
irresponsible. She believes that she was overwhelmed by the circumstances. She noted 
that in 2014, her spouse’s medical problems were so bad that he could no longer work. 
He applied for disability payments, but the state denied him disability because they 
believe his injuries are service related and the Army should pay the disability. The 
Veterans Administration denied him disability payments because they believe his 
 
4 
 
 
injuries are not service connected. Applicant believes that she did everything she could 
to keep her financial situation under control.  
 
Concerning the 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant explained that 
she had pregnancy complications and went on unpaid maternity leave for a long period 
before and after the child’s birth. Her spouse was trying to support the family while she 
was on unpaid maternity leave. The child died shortly after she was born, and Applicant 
had to bear the funeral expenses. She lost her job shortly after the bankruptcy 
discharge. (Tr. 33) 
 
Applicant’s judgments were filed against her between 2008 and 2015, and they 
are still outstanding. She averred that she is planning on contesting the judgments in 
court for a number of fairness and legal reasons. As of her hearing, she had taken no 
action to contest any of the judgments. She presented no documentary evidence of any 
contacts with the judgment creditors or of any payments made on any of the SOR 
accounts since she opened them. 
 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to show that she has paid or 
made payments arrangements on any of the debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
explained that her low earnings have prevented her from paying her debts. Applicant 
anticipated that by August 2017, she would be current on her living expenses and 
recent debts. At that point, she was planning to start addressing her delinquent debts. 
(Tr. 59) Applicant’s current salary is $68,000 yearly. Her take-home pay bi-weekly is 
about $2,000. At the end of the month, she has about $300 left over. 
 
Applicant and her spouse signed up for financial counseling, but they never 
finished the counseling. Her husband is preparing a budget with the assistance of his 
aunt who is a financial consultant, and she provides them with financial advice.  
 
Applicant understands the security concerns raised by her financial situation. She 
believes that she is completely trustworthy, as demonstrated by her 18 years of service 
working for federal contractors. Applicant would like to continue working for federal 
contractors. She believes that her financial situation is currently improving as a result of 
her better-paying jobs. She noted that her earnings are meeting the family needs and 
anticipated starting to pay her creditors in the near future. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
 
5 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of failure to satisfy her debt and to meet her financial 
obligations is documented in the record. Applicant’s dischargeable financial obligations 
were discharged in 2004, pursuant to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing. Between 2004 and 
2016, Applicant accumulated the 31 delinquent or in collection accounts alleged in the 
SOR. They include 7 judgments, 22 delinquent medical services accounts, and 2 utility 
delinquent accounts, all of which total approximately $35,000, and are currently 
delinquent. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts” and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the above 
disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case, and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are multiple, recurrent, and ongoing. Applicant established that her financial 
problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond her control. 
Notwithstanding, she failed to submit any documentary evidence of any efforts to 
resolve her debts. She failed to prove her income was insufficient to address any of her 
debts, including three that are $100 or less. She presented no evidence of contacts with 
creditors, payment plans, disputes, or that she made any payments on any of the SOR 
debts. The evidence suggests that Applicant was overwhelmed by her circumstances 
and was unable to repay the debts. Nevertheless, Applicant failed to present any 
evidence showing that she attempted to be financially responsible under the 
circumstances. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 42, failed to demonstrate financial responsibility. It is well settled that 
once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a 
strong presumption against the granting a security clearance. Unmitigated financial 
considerations security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance 
to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of her past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her 
obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.ff:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
