 
1 
 
  
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 15-06006 
  )  
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant owes approximately 
$29,000 on two collection accounts. No documentation was presented showing payment 
on the delinquent obligations. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility 
for a public trust position. Acting under the relevant DoD Directive,1 the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on March 17, 2017, detailing financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
On April 11, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On April 25, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
                                                          
1 Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contained five attachments (Items). On May 5, 2017, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the 
Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. On June 8, 2017, two letters were received from 
Applicant. DC did not object to the admission of the letters, which were admitted as 
exhibits (Ex.) A and B. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s public trust position eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two delinquent debts, which totaled 
$29,311. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleading and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old training specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2007, and seeks to obtain a public trust position. (Item 1) From 
June 1987 through June 2007, Applicant honorably served in the U.S. Navy, retiring in 
June 2007. (Item 3) Applicant’s household has three sources of income: Applicant’s 
military retirement, his work for a defense contractor, and his wife’s income for her full-
time employment at an auto dealership. (Ex. B)  
 
The Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of the logistics training center has worked alongside 
Applicant in a small executive office for 31 months. (Ex. B) The OIC states Applicant is 
honest, dependable, trustworthy, hardworking, responsible, has a positive attitude, and 
has made significant contributions to the job. (Ex. B) Applicant is dedicated to his career, 
country, and family. (Ex. B) The OIC believes there is little risk of Applicant jeopardizing 
his position of trust. (Ex. B)  
 
 In Applicant’s March 2015 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), he indicated he owed approximately $15,000 on the credit card account listed in 
SOR 1.a. (Item 3) He indicated he had attempted to work with the credit card company 
when his pay had been reduced by $1,200 per month. (Item 3) He also indicated he had 
withdrawn $5,000 from his 401(k) retirement fund. (Item 3) The record provides no 
additional information about his reduction in pay or his attempt to work with the creditor. 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
 
 
 A letter from an attorney retained by Applicant indicated Applicant had filed for 
Chapter 13, Wage Earner’s Plan, bankruptcy protection. (Ex. A) The plan required $850 
monthly payments for 60 months. As of May 12, 2017, Applicant’s proposed Chapter 13 
plan had not been confirmed by the bankruptcy court. (Ex. A) 
 
 Department Counsel expressed concerns in the FORM about Applicant’s failure to 
provide evidence of efforts to resolve the debts, as follows: 
 
He has not provided any documentary evidence showing that either 
delinquent account is paid, is the subject of an agreed upon and current 
payment plan, or is otherwise resolved. Nor is there any specific, concrete 
evidence showing the he acted responsibly under the circumstances 
leading to either delinquent account, provided documentary proof to 
substantiate the basis for any dispute, or any action take to resolve any 
disputed accounts.(FORM page 2) 
Applicant’s response to the FORM provided no documentation showing payment 
of any of his delinquent obligations. He did not set forth what efforts he undertook to pay 
or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts, nor did he provide any documentation as to 
payment on or the current status of his delinquent debts or documentation on the current 
status of his proposed Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating 
to financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
 
5 
 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a public trust position. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes two collection accounts totaling approximately $29,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history 
of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
None of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
apply. Those potentially mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation establishing that any of his delinquent 
obligations have been paid, that his Chapter 13 plan has been court approved, or he has 
made his monthly payments in accord with the plan. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because 
the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and because they remain unpaid, they cannot be 
considered as behavior that happened long ago. There is nothing in the record supporting 
that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual other than his 
 
6 
 
unexplained e-QIP statement that his pay had been reduced by $1,200 per month. 
Applicant provided no information concerning factors beyond his control in recent years 
that could mitigate his inattention to his delinquent debts. There is some evidence that 
Applicant has filed for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which could be considered a responsible 
step to address his past-due debts. However, without knowing the status of his 
bankruptcy plan, AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal applicability. 
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply since Applicant admits 
the delinquent obligations. There is no documented proof substantiating the basis of a 
dispute. Neither AG ¶ 20(f) nor AG ¶ 20(g) apply since neither affluence nor taxes have 
are issues of security concern in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s trustworthiness concerns about his 
delinquent debts since the March 2017 SOR and the April 2017 FORM. He provided scant 
information regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debts, that he has 
contacted his creditors, established repayment agreements to address the delinquent 
debts, or is in compliance with a Chapter 13 plan. 
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
 
7 
 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns. He failed to 
offer evidence of financial counseling or provide sufficient documentation regarding his 
past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in 
relying on only the very limited response in his SOR Answer, financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns remain.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to be eligible for a public 
trust position The determination of an individual’s eligibility and suitability for a position of 
trust is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both 
disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current 
circumstances, a public trust position is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid 
his delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or compliance 
with the Chapter 13 plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due obligations, 
he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his worthiness for a public trust position.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a public trust position. (See AG & 
2(a)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
