 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-03944  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns, resulting 
from unpaid taxes and delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD 
after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective 
for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on February 4, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2) On 
March 9, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on March 16, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. In response, Applicant submitted a 
letter and attachments (Reply). He did not object to any of the Government’s Items and 
Department Counsel did not object to his Reply. Hence, Items 1 through 9, and the Reply 
are admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is married and has two children and two-stepchildren. 
He finished high school in 1990 and earned a certification from a state drafting institute in 
1995. Since 2001, he has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor. In 2011, 
he started a part-time position for a state agency. (Item 3)  
 
 On September 21, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). In it, he disclosed that he failed to timely pay state taxes for 2010 and 2011.  He 
noted that financial stress and mishandling his tax obligations contributed to the tax 
problems. He planned to pay or begin resolving the debts by November 2012. (Item 3)  
 
 During June and July 2013 interviews, Applicant discussed various delinquent 
debts, including many that were subsequently alleged in the SOR. He disclosed that he 
owed unpaid taxes to the Federal government for 2011 and 2012, and unpaid state taxes 
for 2010, 2011, and 2012.  He stated that some   financial problems arose in 2007 after 
other family members moved into his home because of unforeseen difficulties. He 
admitted that he could have managed his finances better during those times. (Item 9) In 
his February 2017 answer, he also noted that the debts arose after he experienced a loss 
of income for 2014 and 2015. (Item 2) In his Reply, he added that he was unable to pay 
his obligations as a consequence of the unexpected family problems, home repairs, and 
the loss of yearly employment bonuses due to a decrease in his company’s profits. 
(Reply) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from April 2015, May 2013, and December 
2012, the SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts, including 2 judgments. They debts became 
delinquent between 2012 and 2015, and total about $20,000. The SOR also included 
three allegations of unpaid state and Federal taxes for years 2010, 2011, and 2012. (Item 
4, Item 5, Item 6) Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR, except the tax lien in SOR 
¶ 1.j because he did not recognize the state listed. (Item 2) The status of each allegation 
is as follows: 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1. Applicant stated that he paid $1,000 on the $7,448 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
through a payment plan. He did not provide proof of his assertion. (Item 2) It is unresolved. 
 
 2. The $3,751 credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b is unresolved. 
 
 3. Applicant paid the $254 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 2) It is resolved. 
 
 4. The $980 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d is unresolved. 
 
 5. Applicant is making payments on the $1,112 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. As of 
January 2016, he reduced the balance to $859. (Item 2) It is being resolved. 
 
 6. Applicant said he was negotiating a resolution of the $650 cell phone debt listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.f. He provided no proof of payments on the plan. (Item 2) It is unresolved. 
 
 7. Applicant said he thought he paid the $594 debt, listed in SOR ¶ 1.g, which is 
owed to the same cell phone carrier listed in SOR ¶ 1.f, above. (Item 2) It is unresolved. 
 
 8. In February 2016, Applicant paid $96 on the $481 retail debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h. 
He agreed to make four payments. (Item 2) It is being resolved.  
 
 9. The $408 credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.i is unresolved. 
 
 10. The $2,464 state tax lien filed in 2012 and alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is unpaid.2  
 
 11. The $2,275 judgment owed to the homeowner’s association listed in SOR ¶ 
1.k was paid through a garnishment and released in January 2016. (Item 2) It is resolved. 
 
 12. The $1,934 judgment owed to homeowner’s association listed in SOR ¶ 1.l 
was paid through a garnishment and released in April 2017. This is the same creditor as 
listed SOR ¶ 1.k above. (Reply) It is resolved. 
 
 13. Applicant submitted documentation that he resolved his unpaid 2010 and 2011 
state taxes through a 2016 state tax refund he received in April 2017. (Reply) There is no 
evidence that he paid or has a plan to pay state taxes owed for 2012, as alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.m.These taxes are unresolved. 
 
 14. Applicant’s 2011 and 2012 unpaid Federal taxes, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n, 
remain unresolved. In his Reply, he stated that he was in contact with a tax specialist to 
address his 2014 taxes, indicating that they also remain unresolved.3  
                                                 
2 The name of the state listed in this allegation is incorrect. The $2,464 unpaid tax lien is owed to the state 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.m. (FORM at 2)  
3 This derogatory information is not alleged in this case. Hence, it will not be considered in my analysis of 
disqualifying conditions. It may be considered in analyzing mitigating conditions and the whole-person 
concept, and in evaluating Applicant’s credibility. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 During a June 2013 interview, Applicant discussed his budget. His net monthly 
income was $5,765 and his expenses were $6,335, leaving a deficit of about $570. He 
said he contacted a company in 2012 to help manage his debts and set up payment 
plans. He said he was unable to consistently maintain those payment plans. There is no 
information related to his current financial obligations from which to determine his financial 
reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.4  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
                                                 
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet his financial and tax 
obligations, which began in 2010 and continues to date. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. They are as follows: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. It is mitigated. He presented sufficient proof 
that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h are being paid. They are mitigated. He paid and 
satisfied the judgments listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l, albeit through garnishments. These 
debts are mitigated. He resolved his 2010 and 2011 state tax debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.m; however, that allegation is not fully mitigated because he has not resolved his 2012 
unpaid taxes.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances that contributed to his financial problems, or to demonstrate that he has 
made a good-faith effort to pay all of his debts and resolve the unpaid Federal and state 
taxes for several years. These outstanding debts and taxes continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability and judgment. He did not provide proof that he established a repayment 
plan with the taxing bodies and is adhering to the terms. There is limited evidence that he 
participated in credit counseling and there is insufficient evidence that his financial 
problems and all SOR allegations are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d) and 
 
 
7 
 
 
20(g) are not applicable. The financial considerations concerns remain, despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a mature individual, who has worked for a defense contractor since 
2001. He has been experiencing financial problems for over ten years, beginning in 2007 
when family members moved into his home. In 2012, he disclosed unresolved debts and 
taxes in his SCA. During a June 2013 interview, he discussed his history of financial 
issues with an investigator. In early January 2016, he received the December 2015 SOR. 
In February 2016, he answered the SOR. One year later, in March 2017, the FORM 
notified him that he did not fully mitigate the SOR allegations because he did not provide 
sufficient proof that he was paying or resolving many debts and delinquent taxes. In April 
2017, he submitted additional information about the satisfaction of some taxes and debts. 
Despite being aware of the Government’s security concern for many years, he has not 
yet established a solid record of addressing debts, resolving state and Federal taxes, or 
responsibly managing his finances. Overall, the absence of evidence creates sufficient 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:        Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.j:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l:      For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m and 1.n:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
