 
1 
 
                                                              
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 15-08530 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Curry, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s relatives living in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) generate a 
vulnerability to coercion that she was unable to mitigate. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
Government, DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. It recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether her clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On June 14, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, denying the allegations and 
requesting a hearing. On February 17, 2017, Applicant withdrew her request for a 
hearing and requested a decision on the written record. On March 8, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM 
on March 9, 2017. She did not file a response. On October 1, 2017, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.  
 
While my decision was pending, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was issued 
establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information 
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Preliminary Rulings 
 
1. Item 2 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on September 22, 2014. In the FORM, Department Counsel 
informed Applicant that such reports are typically inadmissible without authenticating 
witnesses, and that she could either object to its admissibility, or clarify any inaccuracies 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Applicant did not respond. Consequently, I have considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
2. I took administrative notice of the information in Item 4 regarding the security profile 
of PRC vis a vis the United States. 
 
3.  Department Counsel conceded that Applicant mitigated the Guideline C security 
concern. Therefore, I resolve it in her favor.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old married woman with two children. She was born, 
raised, and educated through high school in the PRC.  She immigrated to the United 
States in 2009 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013. In 2010, she married her 
husband, a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Item 2 at 18) In 2015, she earned a bachelor’s 
degree. Since graduating, she has worked for a federal contractor as a technologist. 
(Item 2 at 13) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC. (Item 2 at 20, 22) Both 
parents work in an energy-related field. (Item 2 at 21, 23) Applicant talks to her mother 
weekly and her father monthly. (Item 2 at 20, 23) They desire to immigrate to the United 
States to be closer to their grandchildren. (Item 1 at 3) 
 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision 
in this case. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In 2014, when Applicant was in college, she met and became friends with a 
student who was a PRC citizen. They stayed in touch for the remainder of the school 
year, but gradually lost touch after her friend returned to the PRC in 2015. She has not 
had any contact with her since then. (Item 1 at 3) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The PRC is a totalitarian state that intimidates its citizens by resorting to 
extralegal measures such as enforced disappearances and house arrest to quash 
dissent. (Item 4 at 36) The PRC considers itself a strategic competitor of the United 
States and is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. information and technology. 
(Item 4 at 7) PRC intelligence services frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or 
persons with family ties to the PRC to steal trade secrets. (Item 4 at 11)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance.” (AG ¶ 6)  
 
  The PRC is a strategic competitor of the United States, with a totalitarian 
government that routinely monitors its citizens. It engages in espionage against the 
United States. Consequently, Applicant’s relationship with her parents, both citizens and 
residents of the PRC, triggers the application of the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
 Applicant has not been in contact with her friend whom she met while in college, 
since her friend returned home to PRC. This relationship generates no security concern, 
therefore, I resolve subparagraph 2.c in her favor. 
  
 Applicant has been living in the United States for approximately eight years. She 
graduated from college, met her husband, and settled down in the United States, 
starting and raising a family. These factors, though significant, are insufficient to 
overcome the heavy burden generated by the PRC. AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of 
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign 
person, or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
states, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest,” does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has become thoroughly integrated into 
American culture and society. However, the totalitarian nature of the PRC, together with 
its history of espionage against the United States, creates a heavy burden with respect 
to the vulnerability to coercion through her parents. The evidence she supplied is 
insufficient to overcome the security concern of potential foreign influence. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
     
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:      Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
