KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST:  Applicant argues that documents he submitted did not make it into the record.  From
our review of the record, we conclude that Applicant has failed to establish a prima facie case
that he provided documents that did not make it into the record or that he was denied due
process. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-04027.a1
DATE: 03/06/2018
DATE: March 06, 2018
In Re:
---------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04027
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant1 a security clearance.  On
December 21, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 1, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Finding of Fact and Analysis
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 14 delinquent debts totaling about $30,000.  Credit
reports in the record established the alleged debts.  Applicant’s response to the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) argues all of the alleged debts, except a student loan, were not owed by him and
the credit reports are incorrect.  In making that argument, he highlighted incorrect date of birth
entries and variations of his name in some credit reports.
The Judge found in favor of Applicant on a student loan that he resolved and against him on
the remaining debts because no evidence was submitted to establish they were resolved or reduced. 
Applicant provided no independent evidence that all of the debts were not his responsibility.  In his
security clearance application (SCA) of April 2013, Applicant listed several delinquent debts,
including one for a repossessed vehicle, another vehicle debt, a cable television bill, and two credit
card debts.  No evidence was submitted that the debts listed in the SCA were not the same as some
of those listed in the SOR.  Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from the alleged
debts.        
Discussion
In his appeal brief, Applicant argues that documents he submitted did not make it into the
record.  He claims that he submitted letters from a city and a community college that reflected his
personal information was stolen.2  Those letters are not contained in the record.  We note Applicant
made two documentary submissions that are in the record, i.e., his responses to the SOR and the
FORM.  In his response to the SOR, he specifically listed the documents that he provided.  Letters
1 Applicant’s last name listed in the above caption is different from that listed in the Judge’s decision.  In his
appeal brief, he stated that his last name was incorrectly listed in the decision.  We note, however, that the last name
listed for him in both the SOR and the Decision matches the last name he provided in his SCA.
2 Applicant also claims that he submitted his social security card, which is not in the record.  His correct social
security number is not an issue in this case and is reflected in a Government document in the record.
2
from the city or community college were not listed in his SOR response.  In that document, however,
he did refer to a letter from the county informing him that his personal information was stolen, and
he noted he contacted the city for assistance.  While his FORM response does address the documents
he was submitting, he did not identify those documents with the same specificity as he did in his
SOR response.  His FORM response makes no mention that he was providing letters from the city
or community college.  From our review of the record, we conclude that Applicant has failed to
establish a prima facie case that he provided documents that did not make it into the record or that
he was denied due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02933 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 23, 2016). 
Moreover, even if Applicant submitted letters from the city and community college that did not
make it into the record, such an error was harmless because it did not likely affect the outcome of
the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).  In this regard, we note
that Applicant provided letters from the state comptroller and the U.S. Office of Personnel
Management reflecting that his personal identifiable information had been compromised.  Similar
information from the city or community college would have merely been cumulative evidence.  
Applicant also argues that, except for his student loan, the debts alleged in the SOR were not
his responsibility, but were the result of identity theft.  This argument is not persuasive.  As the
Judge noted, Applicant disclosed delinquent debts in his SCA and explained why he became
delinquent on those debts.  At least three of the debts disclosed in his SCA match debts alleged in
the SOR.  The matching debts include a vehicle loan placed for collection for about $14,300 (SOR
¶ 1.f), a charged-off  vehicle loan for about $2,300 (SOR ¶ 1.h), and a cable television bill for about
$450 (SOR ¶ 1.n).  The names of the creditors and account numbers that Applicant listed for those
debts in his SCA match entries in credit reports from which the SOR allegations pertaining to those
debts were derived. Additionally, the amounts that he listed for those debts in his SCA are very
similar to those alleged in the SOR.  The record contains substantial evidence to establish that the
debts in SOR ¶ 1.f, 1.h, and 1.n were Applicant’s responsibility.  Moreover, those debts are
sufficient to support the Judge’s adverse clearance decision.  Applicant’s inconsistent statements
about those debts undermines his claim that other debts were the result of identity theft.  In short,
the Judge found that credit reports in the record established the alleged the debts, and those debts
were Applicant’s responsibility.  Applicant has failed to establish the Judge erred in making those
findings. 
Applicant further argues the Judge did not consider all the evidence or mis-weighed the
evidence.  His arguments, however, are neither enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record nor sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
16-00844 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
 
Signed: Charles C. Hale         
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
