 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 15-03597 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient information about his efforts to resolve debts 
resulting from two repossessed vehicles, a telecommunications account, and his federal 
income tax debt. He did not provide documentation showing payments or the current 
status of these four debts. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 17, 2013, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 3. On November 
23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). 
Item 1. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2 
                                         
 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Item 1. 
 
On January 11, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. Item 2. On 
September 20, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On December 18, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. On July 26, 2017, Department Counsel completed a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) including six exhibits (Items 1-6). On August 1, 2017, 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the evidence in 
the FORM, and Items 1-6 are admitted into evidence.   
  
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which are applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 
2006 AGs and are effective on June 8, 2017. I have evaluated Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.i. Item 2. He denied the remainder of the SOR allegations. His admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and he has been employed with a DOD contractor as a 
system administrator since July 2012.3 In 1990, he graduated from high school. From 
August 2010 to July 2012, he worked for a different DOD contractor as a system 
administrator. From June 1997 to July 2010, he worked for a non-DOD contractor as a 
central office technician. He also worked as a help desk specialist for four months in 2009. 
He has never served in the military. In 2000, he married, and his children were born in 
1993 and 2000. There is no evidence of criminal activity, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal 
drugs, or violations of employer’s rules. 
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s June 17, 2013, Questionnaire for 
National Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Item 3. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant indicated he had insufficient income to keep all of his debts in current 
status. He gave a higher priority to paying for his son’s private school education than to 
paying some of his other debts, including his delinquent tax debt. Item 4.  
 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts, and their status is as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off vehicle loan for $23,905. On July 3, 2013, an 
Office of Personnel Management investigator interviewed Applicant about his delinquent 
debts. Item 4. Applicant admitted that he had a vehicle loan for $23,905; however, he said 
he paid the debt in full in May or June 2013, and he is waiting for paperwork regarding 
the final pay off. Item 4. There is also an indication a debt for $25,845 could be for a 
previous truck; however, he had no knowledge of the $25,845 debt. Item 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent debt resulting from a vehicle loan for $4,461. In 
2012, Applicant’s vehicle was repossessed. Item 4. In 2013, the delinquent debt from a 
vehicle loan for $4,461 was being addressed through garnishment of his or his spouse’s 
pay. Item 4.4 He disclosed this debt on his June 17, 2013 SCA. Item 3. Applicant 
contested the amount of the debt because he believed he should have received more for 
his vehicle when it was repossessed. Item 4. He did not provide documentation showing 
the garnishments. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d allege two telecommunications debts placed for collection for 
$439.5 His March 30, 2015 credit report shows the telecommunications collection account 
with an outstanding balance of $439 and a past-due amount of $439. Item 6 at 2.    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g allege three delinquent medical accounts for $50, $50, 
and $35. In Applicant’s OPM interview, he said he did not recognize the three medical 
debts. Item 4. His June 29, 2013 credit report shows the three delinquent medical debts 
with balances of $50, $50, and $37 and past-due amounts of $50, $50, and $37. Item 5 
at 4. His March 30, 2015 credit report shows the three medical collection accounts with 
outstanding balances of $50, $50, and $35; however, no past-due amounts are shown. 
Item 6 at 2.   
                                            
4 Of course, Applicant loses some mitigating credit because some debt payments were made 
through garnishment. Payment of a debt “though garnishment rather than a voluntary effort diminishes its 
mitigating force.” Compare ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2010) with ISCR Case No. 
04-07360 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006) (payment of two of four debts through garnishment did not bar 
mitigation of financial considerations concerns). See also ISCR Case No. 09-05700 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 
2011) (garnished payments towards delinquent tax debts are not mitigating information in light of other 
factors); ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009) (remanding the case to the administrative 
judge and stating when addressing an Internal Revenue Service garnishment, “On its face, satisfaction of 
a debt through the involuntary establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a 
good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.”). 
  
5 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are verbatim duplications of each other. SOR ¶ 1.d is found for Applicant as 
a duplication. Different debt numbers in credit reports are not necessarily a reliable indication that different 
debts are involved.  
 
4 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a telecommunications debt placed for collection for $34. Item 2. 
His March 30, 2015 credit report shows the telecommunications collection account with 
an outstanding balance of $34; however, no past-due amount is shown. Item 6 at 2.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges Applicant failed to file his federal income tax return for tax year 
2010 and to pay in full his federal income taxes. In 2013, he owed the IRS about $20,000 
in delinquent federal income taxes. Items 2, 3. He disclosed his failure to file his tax return 
and his tax debt on his June 17, 2013 SCA. Item 3. He told the OPM investigator that his 
tax debt for tax year 2010 was about $20,000, and in June 2013, he contacted the IRS to 
try to negotiate a settlement. In 2012, the IRS garnished $70 monthly from his salary to 
address this debt. Item 4.  
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR debts. FORM at 2-3. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary evidence that Applicant 
paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the SOR debts. 
The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. FORM at 3. He did 
not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and Director of National Intelligence have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal 
Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,6 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                            
6 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;7   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue;  
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
                                            
7 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
Applicant failed to timely file and pay his federal income taxes for tax year 2010 
when due. In ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 4 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board 
reversed the grant of a security clearance and commented as follows: 
 
Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government rules 
and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information.  .  .  .  By failing to [comply 
with tax laws], Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good 
judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified 
information.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is mitigated as a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant is also 
credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h, which are for $50, $50, 
$35, and $34. Applicant consistently denied responsibility for these four debts. His March 
30, 2015 credit report does not show any outstanding balance owed. These four debts 
total $169 and are not of sufficient magnitude to cause a security concern.  
 
Applicant did not provide documentation relating to the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.c, and 1.i. such as: (1) proof of payments, for example, checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish 
maintenance of contact;8 (3) copies of credible debt disputes sent to the creditor and/or 
credit reporting companies indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debt 
and why he held such a belief; (4) evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, for 
example, settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve this 
debt; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution.  
   
Applicant did not provide documentation showing the specific amounts currently 
owed on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.i. There is insufficient evidence about 
why Applicant was unable to make greater documented progress resolving these four 
debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial problem is being resolved and will 
not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
                                            
8 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current.  
 
9 
                                         
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and he has been employed with a DOD contractor as a 
system administrator since July 2012. In 1990, he graduated from high school. From 
August 2010 to July 2012, he worked for a different DOD contractor as a system 
administrator. From June 1997 to July 2010, he worked for a non-DOD contractor as a 
central office technician. He also worked as a help desk specialist for four months in 2009. 
He has never served in the military. In 2000, he married, and his children were born in 
1993 and 2000. There is no evidence of criminal activity, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal 
drugs, or violations of employer’s rules. 
 
The evidence against grant of a security clearance is more substantial. Applicant 
owes delinquent federal income taxes from tax year 2010, and he has not paid the debts 
resulting from two repossessed vehicles and a telecommunications debt. There is no 
evidence of the current status, payments, or payment plans addressing these four debts. 
His actions raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the granting a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations security 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 
10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole person. Financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time.  
 
  
 
10 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.h:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
