  1 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07961 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 In an unsigned letter, Applicant 
answered the allegations raised in the SOR. He also requested a decision based on the 
administrative record without a hearing. On April 7, 2016, the Government issued a File 
of Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to 
me on October 1, 2017. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant 
mitigated security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG was amended. The 
present AG, applied here, is in effect for any adjudication dated on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
  2 
 
  Request for Administrative Notice  
 
The Government requested that I take administrative notice of its proffer of 
information regarding the Republic of India (India). Having reviewed the information2 
contained in the FORM at Item 5, I find the following:3  
 
• India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament. The president is the head of state, and the prime minister is the head of the 
government. Recent elections, which were regarded by observers to have been 
conducted freely and fairly, included more than 551 million participants.4  
 
• The 2000 and 2008 Annual Reports to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage identified India as being involved in economic 
collection and industrial espionage. As of 2015, India remains on the Office of U.S. 
Trade Representative’s Priority Watch List, based on its history of trademark 
counterfeiting and copyright piracy, and a recognized concern about counterfeit 
pharmaceuticals being produced in India and shipped to the United States.  
 
• A June 2016 summary from the U.S. Department of Justice details several 
recent criminal cases involving export and embargo enforcement, economic espionage, 
and theft of trade secrets, involving either companies and individuals in India or the 
government of India.  
 
• Counterterrorism cooperation between India and the United States continued to 
increase in 2016, with both sides committing to deepen bilateral engagement against 
the full spectrum of terrorism threats. Indian leadership expressed resolve to redouble 
efforts, in cooperation with the United States and with other like-minded countries, to 
bring to justice the perpetrators of terrorism. India and the United States pledged to 
strengthen cooperation against terrorist threats from groups including al-Qa’ida, ISIS, 
Jaish-e-Mohammad, and Lashkar e-Tayyiba. India continued to experience terrorist and 
insurgent activities. Anti-Western terrorist groups active in India, some of which are also 
on the U.S. government’s own list of foreign terrorist organizations, include Islamist 
extremist groups such as Jaish-e-Mohammed, and Lashker-e Tayyiba.5  
 
                                                          
2 In addition to the offered information contained in the FORM at Index 5, I also considered relevant 
information concerning India used in other current DOHA decisions.  
 
3 Unless otherwise noted, the administrative notice facts about India are all taken from FORM, Item 5.   
 
4 See https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/265748.pdf (U.S. State Department 2016 Human 
Rights Report for India).This report, along with the 2016 State Department Country Report on Terrorism 
(cited below in footnote 5), was published in 2017, before this case was assigned to me for a decision. 
Both reports postdate the previous versions, cited in the FORM. Administrative notice is hereby taken of 
certain more recent facts referenced in them in order to make assessments based on timely information in 
cases involving foreign influence. 
 
5 See https://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2016/272233.htm#INDIA (U.S. State Department 2016 Country 
Report on Terrorism for India). 
 
  3 
 
• As of 2016, the most significant human rights problems involved police and 
security force abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape. Corruption 
remained widespread and contributed to ineffective responses to crimes, including 
those against women, children, and members of scheduled castes or tribes. Other 
human rights problems have included disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, 
arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial detention. A lack of accountability for 
misconduct at all levels of government has persisted, contributing to widespread 
impunity.6 
• India does not permit its citizens to hold dual citizenship. In 2006, India 
launched the Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) program. It is not a dual-nationality 
program and does not grant Indian citizenship.7 A U.S. citizen who obtains an OCI card 
can travel to and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in India, and own property 
in India (except for certain agricultural and plantation properties). An OCI card holder is 
ineligible for an Indian passport or for Indian government employment and cannot vote 
in Indian elections. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old consultant who has worked for the same employer, a 
defense contractor, since July 2011. His previous employment, which was in the private 
or state government sectors, was continuous and dates back to at least 1999. This is 
his first application for a security clearance. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree. 
Applicant is married and has two adult children. Applicant and his wife have owned their 
own home in this country since 2003. It is where they reside and have raised their 
children. Applicant considers himself to be exclusively a United States citizen. 
 
 Born in India, Applicant was raised and educated in that country, ultimately 
earning a bachelor’s degree in 1986. In 1992, he married his wife in India. The two had 
their first child in India, before immigrating to the United States in 1996. Their second 
child was born in this country. Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen in 
June 2008. Both Applicant’s wife and eldest child have also become naturalized United 
States citizens.  
 
Remaining in India are Applicant’s brother and three sisters, as well as his in-
laws, who remain citizens and residents of that country. None of Applicant’s family or in-
laws have worked for the government of India or held political office, and all are at or 
near retirement.  
 
Applicant’s brother is a retired accountant who worked in the private sector. They 
speak by phone weekly. Regarding his sisters, one is a high school principal, one is a 
                                                          
6 See U.S. State Department 2016 Human Rights Report for India. 
 
7 As noted in ISCR Case No. 15-06593 (Sept. 26, 2017) at 4: “[An] OCI card is essentially a multiple entry 
visa and facilitates [sic] travel to India. It does not grant any privileges of Indian citizenship, except for 
unlimited travel to and from India.” Citing to “Dual Nationality," U.S. Embassy & Consulates in India. U.S. 
Embassy & Consulates in India, US State Department, US Government (Retrieved 21 April 2017), 
Wikipedia notes: “Most overseas countries such as the United States of America do not recognise the 
OCI as citizenship of another country.” See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Overseas_Citizenship_of_ 
India#Overseas_recognition 
  4 
 
school teacher, and one is a private sector accountant. Applicant speaks with each of 
them once a week or once a month by phone. He visits them about once a year.   
 
Applicant’s father-in-law has no occupation. Applicant’s brothers-in-law work as a 
computer technician and an accountant, respectively. One sister-in-law is a teacher, 
and the other is a housewife. Applicant speaks with them about once a month by phone. 
 
In about 1993, before he emigrated from India, Applicant, a brother, and their 
father bought a property in India. It is now co-owned with his brother. Applicant 
estimates its value at $50,000. In addition, Applicant may inherit a 1/5th share of his 
parent’s estate, which includes a home worth about $150,000. Applicant also maintains 
a bank account in India so he can help family members financially, if needed.  
 
 In 2010, Applicant applied for and received an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) 
card for travel to India. It expires in April 2050.The card serves as an extended visa and 
is only available to former citizens of India. He has only used it to ease transit when 
visiting family in India. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence that transcends beyond 
normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in 
those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may fail to safeguard such information.  
 
  5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
Guideline C  at AG ¶ 9 notes that when an individual acts in such a way as to 
indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. national interests or when the 
individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of 
another country is not disqualifying without a showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or privilege of 
foreign citizenship and any action to acquire recognition of a foreign citizenship.   
 
Under AG ¶ 10, conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include:  
 
AG ¶ 10(a): applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country;  
 
AG ¶ 10(b): failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any country 
other than the United States; and 
 
AG ¶ 10(c): failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S. 
 
As noted, when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he may be prone to provide information or 
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. Applicant has 
rebutted the allegation, in part, in SOR ¶ 1.a that he exercised a foreign preference for 
India over the United States by obtaining an OCI card. He presented persuasive 
documentary evidence that the OCI visa does not confer rights of citizenship because 
India does not permit dual citizenship. For that reason, obtaining and using the OCI visa 
is not an exercise of foreign citizenship.  
 
The OCI visa does not fall under the plain meaning of the disqualifying condition 
at AG ¶ 10(a), because it was not an “exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” nor does it fall under the other 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 10(b), (c), or (d). But that does not end the analysis, 
because possession and use of the OCI visa does fall under the general concern at AG 
¶ 9, by acting ‘”in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” The OCI visa, although not a privilege or benefit of citizenship, is a 
privilege or benefit extended to Applicant as a former citizen of India. Accordingly, the 
DOD was justified in inquiring into Applicant’s possession and use of the OCI visa after 
becoming a U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant has rebutted the allegation, in SOR ¶ 1.a, that he demonstrated a 
foreign preference by exercising his rights as a former citizen of India by obtaining an 
OCI card after becoming a United States citizen. Persuasive documentary evidence 
  6 
 
was introduced indicating the OCI visa does not constitute an exercise of foreign 
citizenship because India does not permit dual citizenship. The OCI visa does not fall 
under the plain meaning of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), because it was not 
an “exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a 
U.S. citizen,” nor does it fall under the other disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 10(b), (c), 
or (d). But that does not end the analysis, because possession and use of the OCI visa 
does fall under the general concern at AG ¶ 9, by acting ‘”in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States.” The OCI visa, although not a 
privilege or benefit of citizenship, is a privilege or benefit extended to Applicant as a 
former citizen of India. Accordingly, the DOD was justified in inquiring into Applicant’s 
possession and use of the OCI visa after becoming a U.S. citizen.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  
 
AG ¶ 11(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national 
security interests;  
 
AG ¶ 11(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference;  
 
AG ¶ 11(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the 
foreign citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests;  
 
AG ¶ 11(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen;  
 
AG ¶ 11(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign 
citizenship do not present a national security concern;  
 
AG ¶ 11(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, 
entity, or association that poses a low national security risk;  
 
AG ¶ 11(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. 
law, or the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required 
by U.S. law; and  
 
AG ¶ 11(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving 
the approval by the agency head or designee. 
 
In mitigation, like the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 10, this case does not fall 
under any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 11. That, however, does not end the 
analysis. First, I considered the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s conduct, to 
include his knowledgeable participation in acquiring the OCI card. He was not working 
for a defense contractor at the time. He did not know at the time, nor should he have 
known, that his possession and use of the OCI visa would fall under the scrutiny of DOD 
security officials in the future.  
 
  7 
 
Second, I considered Applicant’s motivation in obtaining the OCI visa. He 
explained he obtained the OCI visa simply for ease of transit to and within India. In other 
words, his motivation was convenience (as opposed to taking advantage of an 
opportunity without regard for the consequences), which is benign or neutral and not a 
demonstration of a preference for India over the United States. Had his motivation been 
otherwise, he could have decided to remain an Indian citizen living in the United States 
as a lawful resident alien and traveled on an Indian passport, a course of action he 
rejected when he became a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s possession and use of the OCI 
visa, although not a minor or trivial matter, does not justify an unfavorable clearance 
decision based on a foreign preference. Applicant met his burden to present sufficient 
evidence to explain and mitigate the concerns under foreign preference. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizen to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.8  
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information; and  
 
                                                          
8 While not sufficient to dismiss related concerns, I note that while India’s governmental and private 
entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have been known to capitalize on 
private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, there is insufficient information to conclude that India’s 
interests target U.S. citizens for classified or sensitive information. I also note that while terrorism exists 
within India, it is being vigorously fought by the state.  
  8 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups within India create a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. AG ¶ 7(a) 
raises a security concern regarding Applicant’s immediate family members including his 
father-in-law, who are citizens of and reside in India.  
 
AG ¶ 7(b) is applicable because Applicant’s connections with his family members 
and in-laws in India create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and his desire to help those relations by 
providing that information.  
 
AG ¶ 7(f) applies because Applicant has a bank account, property, and financial 
interests in India.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Of 
these conditions, four potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
AG ¶ 8 (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest;  
AG ¶ 8(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies because Applicant’s family members and in-laws in India are 
not in positions that may result in his having to choose the interests of the foreign 
government over the interests of the United States. Moreover, none of Applicant’s family 
or in-laws has worked for the government of India or held political office. Applicant’s 
brother and one sister are retired private sector accountants, while his other two sisters 
  9 
 
work in lower education. Applicant’s father-in-law has no occupation. Applicant’s 
brothers-in-law work as a computer technician and an accountant, respectively. One 
sister-in-law is a teacher, while the other does not work outside the home. None of 
these family members are in positions that should make Applicant vulnerable to 
compromise. 
 
 I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies. While Applicant has familial obligations to his relatives 
and in-laws who are citizens of and reside in India, his wife resides with him in the 
United States. Applicant’s children are here. Applicant is a U.S. citizen. Applicant has 
longstanding ties to the United States, having lived in the United States since 1996. He 
has worked for the same company in the United States for 7 years. Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply because Applicant’s relationship with his family 
members and in-laws in India cannot be described as casual and infrequent.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies. While not much is known about Applicant’s financial holdings in 
the United States, it is clear he earns a notable income, and that he owns and maintains 
a house fit for a family of four since 2003. It can be deduced from his occasional bank 
transfers that he maintains bank accounts in this country. In comparison, he owns a 
$25,000 interest in a property he co-owns with a brother and a 1/5th share of his 
parent’s estate, worth about $30,000. It is highly unlikely that Applicant’s assets in India 
are a sufficiently significant lure against Applicant’s home, career, and family in this 
country. This makes it unlikely that a conflict would arise regarding Applicant’s assets in 
India that would place him in a compromising position. Security concerns raised under 
Foreign Influence are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. The ultimate determination of whether 
to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors related to the 
whole-person concept have already been discussed, but some warrant emphasis. 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old consultant who has worked for the same employer 
since July 2011. He has earned a bachelor’s degree. Applicant is married and has two 
grown children. Applicant and his wife have owned their own home in this country since 
2003. He considers himself to be exclusively a United States citizen. 
 
  10 
 
Applicant was born in India and married in 1992, before immigrating to the United 
States. He became a naturalized United States citizen in 2008. Today, Applicant, his 
wife, and two children are all U.S. citizens living in this country.  
 
Before accepting employment with a defense contractor, Applicant obtained an 
OCI visa for ease of transit to India. He did not obtain the card for any other purpose, 
nor did he see it as an exercise of foreign citizenship. It was simply a way for him to visit 
relations in India as they face their elder years and retirement. By all accounts, he is 
content living in the United States as a citizen and resident. It is here that Applicant has 
spent his adult life and raised a family. The evidence indicates that this is where his 
immediate family, profession, and home are located, factors outweighing his less 
influential assets and relations in India.  
 
With regard to foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns 
stemming from Applicant’s ties or connections to India. I have no doubts about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment based on the record presented. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due 
consideration to the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he has met his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
