 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08840 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate concerns raised by his history of alcohol and substance abuse and related 
misconduct. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the criminal conduct, drug involvement and substance misuse, 
and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to deny or revoke his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on October 3, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on October 19, 2016, and provided a response in November 2016. The 
documents appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 93 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, are admitted without objection.   
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, has worked for his current employer as an electronics technician 
since April 2015. Between 2007 and present, Appellant has held five position with 
federal contracting companies. Applicant reported that he applied for and received his 
first security clearance in February 2009 and completed his most recent security 
clearance application in May 2015.  Based on information from the two investigations, 
the SOR alleges the following: a 2012 DUI conviction and subsequent probation 
sentence; use of marijuana in March 2015, which resulted in a failed random urinalysis 
test and the termination of his employment; and termination from employment in 
September 2009 and May 2011 for tardiness.4  
 
 Over the course of 14 years, Applicant was fired four times for violating 
employer’s rules or policies. Applicant was fired in 2004 for failing to show up for an 
assigned shift. Three years later in May 2007, Applicant was fired from a gas station for 
failing to attend a mandatory safety meeting. Applicant also admits that he was fired 
from positions with federal contracting companies in September 2009 and March 2011 
for violating the terms of his probationary employment period by reporting to work late. 
Applicant admits he had a past problem with alcohol. He regularly consumed alcohol to 
the point that he experienced difficulty waking up for work in the morning, causing him 
to report to work late. His alcohol consumption habits also frequently prevented him 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GEs 8 and 9 are reports of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had with a 
background investigator in April 2009 and September 2017, respectively. While Applicant did not 
specifically waive any objections to the admissibility of the ROI, in his response to the FORM, he 
addressed and provided documents for issues only addressed in those documents. Accordingly, I 
construe Applicant’s conduct as a waiver of any objections to the ROI. 
 
4 GE 3-9; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
from taking his children to school, which resulted in a 2011 citation from the local 
sheriff’s office.5  
 Applicant’s alcohol consumption resulted in a 2012 DUI conviction. He was fined, 
required to attend an alcohol counseling class, and was placed on three years 
unsupervised probation. In May 2015, Applicant’s probation was revoked for failure to 
pay the assessed fine, which he could not pay after being fired from his job two months 
earlier. The court extended Applicant’s probation two years until October 2017. 
Applicant successfully completed the terms of his sentence and was released from 
court supervision.6  
 
 In March 2015, Applicant was fired from a third federal contracting company for 
failing a random drug test. Applicant obtained a medical marijuana card and used the 
drug to treat severe pain. He claims to have used the drug once. At the time, Appellant 
was still on probation for the 2012 DUI conviction. Even though Applicant was working 
for a federal contracting company, it is unclear if the security clearance Applicant 
received in 2009 was active. Applicant’s drug use is not limited to the March 2015 
incident. In his 2009 security clearance application, Applicant admits that he used 
methamphetamines four times between August 2004 and October 2005. He also used 
marijuana three times between March 2003 and May 2005. In 2013, Applicant claimed 
responsibility for marijuana police found in his home, during a search the court 
ultimately deemed illegal, to protect his wife from possible criminal liability. He received 
a citation, but was not prosecuted.7 
 
 Applicant claims that he has not used drugs since March 2015 and that he has 
not consumed alcohol since his DUI arrest, over six years ago. He is able to report to 
work on time and his children now have improved attendance records. Applicant offers 
his record with his current employer, of which he did not provide any documentation, 
and a recent his credit report, which shows his open accounts in good standing with no 
missed payments, as evidence of his rehabilitation, reform, and security worthiness.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
5 GE  3-9; AE A. 
6 GE 6-7; AE C.  
 
7GE 4, 6-7, 9.  
 
8 GE 3; AE A, D.  
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case under the criminal 
conduct, drug involvement and substance misuse, and personal conduct guidelines. 
The record establishes that Applicant was convicted of a DUI in 2012, and that he 
violated the terms of his probation, resulting in the extension of his probation by two 
years.9 The record also establishes that in March 2015, Applicant used and tested 
positive for an illegal drug, marijuana.10 Finally, the record establishes that between 
2009 and 2015, Applicant was fired from three jobs for violating his employers’ policies. 
These terminations, which resulted from Applicant’s alcohol and substance abuse, 
                                                          
9 AG ¶¶ 31(b) and (d). 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 25(a)-(b).  
 
 
5 
 
supports a negative whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, unreliability, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics that indicate 
Applicant may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.11   
 
 After reviewing the relevant mitigating conditions under each guideline, I find that 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production or persuasion regarding mitigation. 
None of the available mitigating conditions available under the relevant guidelines 
apply. Each instance of alleged misconduct involved alcohol or substance abuse. 
Despite the age of the events, Applicant claims of six years of sobriety and his 
statements that he will not engage in illegal drug use in the future do not carry much 
weight. Aside from attending a court-ordered alcohol education class, Applicant has not 
submitted to substance abuse counseling. He did not provide any evidence of a sobriety 
management plan, such as participation in Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous. 
Furthermore, he did not provide a written statement of intent to abstain from future drug 
use with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. Given his 
history of alcohol and substance abuse, Applicant failed to establish that relapse and 
the associated personal and professional misconduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d).  In addition to the alleged conduct, unalleged conduct is 
relevant in a whole-person assessment. Here, Applicant’s personal and professional 
conduct shows a disregard for the law, rules, and regulations. He has also 
demonstrated a history of poor judgment. Because of his years of employment with 
federal contracting companies and his prior investigation for access to classified 
information, Applicant knew or should have known about the prohibition against illegal 
drug use and the use of random drug tests to ensure compliance with the policy. 
Despite this, Applicant still chose to use illegal drugs, in violation of federal law, his 
employer’s policy, and without regard for the potential consequences. The favorable 
information Applicant presented does not outweigh the security concerns in this case.  
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 16(d).  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Drug Involvement and  
Substance Misuse:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a     Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.c    Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
