 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07888 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Troy Nussbaum, Esquire, Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG were 
revised on June 8, 2017. The new AGs were applied to Applicant’s case. The outcome 
of Applicant’s case would be the same under either AG.  
  
 On August 3, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 4, 2017. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 17, 2017, and 
transferred to me on May 22, 2017.  The case was originally scheduled for November 
15, 2017.  A continuance was granted and the case was rescheduled for December 19, 
2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered 
six exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6.  Applicant 
testified and offered 23 exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – W. 
 
2 
 
 
The record was held open until January 9, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely provided additional documents which were admitted as AE 
X - AA, without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 27, 2017. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 
October 2015. He has held a security clearance since 2002. He has a college degree. 
He is married and has two daughters, ages 16 and 3. (Tr. 19-20; Gov 1; Gov 2)   
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 21, 2014. A 
subsequent background investigation revealed that he had the following delinquent 
debts: a mortgage account that was delinquent in the amount of $14,175 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a: 
Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 7; Gov 5 at 1; Gov 6 at 5, 13); thirteen delinquent student loan 
accounts placed for collection, an approximate total balance of $80,684 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 
1.l, 1.n, and 1.p: Gov 5 at 2-3); a $2,991 charged-off jewelry store account (SOR ¶ 1.m: 
Gov 3 at 7; Gov 4 at 6; Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 8); a $1,471 delinquent cell phone account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.o: Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 3); and a $1,186 delinquent cell 
phone account placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.q: Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 3) 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $523 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.r: 
Gov 3 at 11; Gov 4 at 15; Gov 5 at 3); a $428 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.s: Gov 3 at 
11; Gov 4 at 14; Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 5); a $422 charged-off cell phone account (SOR ¶ 
1.t: Gov 5 at 3; Gov 6 at 5, 15); a $416 delinquent medical account (SOR ¶ 1.u: Gov 3 
at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 4); a $72 delinquent medical account (SOR ¶ 1.v: Gov 3 at 2; 
Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 4); a $1,275 judgment with an unknown creditor filed against 
Applicant in 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.w: Gov 5 at 6); a $764 judgment filed against Applicant in 
2015 (SOR ¶ 1.x: Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 6); and four traffic tickets owed to a city 
government in the respective amounts of $250, $250, $105, and $55 that were placed 
for collection. (SOR ¶¶ 1.y – 1.bb: Gov 6 at 16)   
 
 Applicant claims his financial problems were caused by his and his wife’s periods 
of unemployment.  He was unemployed from January 2014 to March 2014. His wife was 
unemployed June 2014 through September 2014. In addition in 2016, Applicant’s 
income from the business he runs in his spare time was significantly reduced.  The 
business used to bring in between $1,500 to $2,000 monthly.  The business only earned 
$573 in 2017.  In order to reduce expenses, Applicant transferred his daughter from a 
private school to a public school. Applicant and his wife voluntarily returned a Range 
Rover that had a $900 monthly car payment. Applicant also admits that they did not pay 
attention to their expenses. They were unable to make all their debt payments when 
they encountered periods of unemployment. When Applicant became employed again, 
he began paying off debts. (Tr. 21-27; Gov 1; Gov 2) 
 
 
3 
 
 
The status of the SOR debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  Past-due mortgage account:  In 2015, when Applicant was laid off, 
he applied for a loan modification because they were having problems making their 
mortgage payments due to their loss of income. In January 2017, Applicant and his wife 
began to miss mortgage payments again. This was caused, in part, by legal expenses 
related to Applicant’s security clearance hearing. Applicant and his wife worked with the 
mortgage company and initially established a repayment plan. In November 2017, they 
applied for another loan modification program. They are waiting for the mortgage 
company to process the loan modification. (Tr.32-41; AE A;  AE P; AE R) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.i, 1.n, 1.p, delinquent student loan accounts:  In 2014, Applicant 
and his wife applied to consolidate all of their student loans into one account. Once the 
consolidation was complete, they assumed all of their loans were consolidated together.  
Applicant discovered that his loans were not consolidated with his wife’s loans when he 
met with the investigator conducting his background investigation. Applicant later 
discovered that his wife’s loans were consolidated and his name was added to her 
loans, but his loans were not consolidated with his wife’s loans. He was not making 
payments towards his loans because he believed that they were consolidated with his 
wife’s student loans. Applicant is attempting to bring his student loans current. He will 
then apply to consolidate his loans. He is on a repayment schedule for his student 
loans, which he began in June 2017. He makes the payment by automatic deduction. 
(Tr. 41-53; AE B; AE Q; AE R)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.m:  $2,991 charged-off jewelry store account:  Applicant settled this 
debt for $1,000 on December 15, 2017. The debt is satisfied. (Tr. 54-56; AE S)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.o:  $1,471 cell phone account placed for collection: Applicant settled 
this account on November 29, 2017. The debt is satisfied. (Tr. 57-58; AE T)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.r and SOR ¶ 1.s:  $523 and $428 charged-off accounts owed to the 
same creditor:  Applicant disputes these debts but entered into a settlement agreement 
for these debts on December 13, 2017. Under the agreement the debts were to be 
satisfied in early January 2018. After the settlement, Applicant intends to continue to 
dispute the accounts. (Tr. 60; AE E; AE V) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.t:  $422 charged-off cell phone account: Applicant claims this is the 
same account as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o. He settled this account in November 
2017. The debt is satisfied. (Tr. 57-58; AE T)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.u: $416 delinquent medical account:  Applicant paid this debt on 
December 15, 2017. The debt is satisfied. (Tr. 62- 64; AE W) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.v:  $72 medical account placed for collection: Applicant paid this debt 
on December 15, 2017. The debt is satisfied. (Tr.62-64; AE W)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.w:  $1,275 judgment entered against Applicant in 2012: Applicant paid 
this debt. (Tr. 64; AE G)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.x:  $764 judgment entered against Applicant in 2015:  Applicant claims 
he disputed this debt and it has been deleted on the most recent credit report. (Tr. 65-
66; AE H; Gov 3)   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.y – 1.bb, unpaid parking tickets placed for collection: Applicant 
provided sufficient proof that these tickets are paid. (Tr. 66-67; AE E; AE I; AE S) 
 
Applicant and his wife are back working full-time positions. They currently earn 
$7,333 in net income each month. Their monthly expenses total $6,853.  The expenses 
include $500 to be deposited in savings each month.  After expenses, they have a $480 
surplus each month. (AE X)   
 
Applicant had issues with the first lawyer he retained. She advised him not to 
make payments towards his debts. One of the reasons Applicant could not pay the 
mortgage after the first loan modification is that Applicant was saving to pay his current 
attorney as well as saving to make payments towards his debts.  Applicant continues to 
work on being more financially stable. His finances are improving.  (Tr. 27-31, 68-70, 
79-81, 92 101-103)  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Mr. W., Applicant’s former manager, supervised Applicant for three years. He 
describes Applicant as “always punctual, alert, and ready to dive into action.” Applicant 
often volunteers for difficult projects. He was willing to work late and on weekends. 
Applicant was one of his best employees and he whole-heartedly vouches for his 
character.  (AE O at 2)  Ms. W., a former co-worker, states Applicant has good moral 
character. He is reliable, dedicated, and never leaves a job unfinished. He will be an 
asset to any company. (AE O at 5)  
 
Ms. A., a personal friend of Applicant’s has known Applicant and his family over 
the past 20 years. She describes Applicant as a cherished friend and loyal person. 
Applicant is thoughtful, reliable, and trustworthy. He has volunteered to coach 
basketball for disadvantaged youth and participated in other volunteer activities. (AE O 
at 1)  Ms. B., another personal friend of Applicant’s says similar favorable things about 
Applicant. She describes Applicant as “a man of great integrity and is dedicated to his 
family and work.” (AE O at 3) Ms. C., another friend, describes Applicant as “a loyal, 
honest considerate, and supportive individual.” (AE O at 4) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
5 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis  
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems over the past few years. He was 
unable to meet his mortgage payments, became delinquent in his student loan 
payments, and incurred additional delinquent debts. The total amount of the 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR include $80,684 in delinquent student loan debt, 
$10,208 delinquent consumer debt and parking tickets and a delinquent mortgage  
account.  AG ¶¶ 19(a), and 19(c) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies because, although Applicant was financially over-extended, 
his financial problems were aggravated by his and his wife’s separate periods of 
unemployment. Applicant’s student loans became delinquent because of a 
misunderstanding about the consolidation of his and his wife’s student loans. Once he 
learned that his student loans were delinquent, he entered into a repayment agreement. 
He is making payments and working towards bringing his student loans current.  At the 
close of the record, he was waiting to see whether the loan modification on his 
mortgage was approved. If not approved, he intends to enter into a repayment 
agreement with the bank. Applicant is diligently working on resolving all the delinquent 
debts and is acting responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s past financial 
issues do not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debts. He provided proof that he resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m, 
1.o, 1.q, 1.t – 1.bb.  He agreed to a settlement and payment agreement for the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.r – 1.s.  Even though Applicant did not provide proof of payment 
towards the settlement, these debts are likely settled. He is making payments towards 
his student loans. He is awaiting approval of his mortgage loan modification. If the 
modification is not approved he will enter into a repayment agreement with the bank. 
Applicant put forth and is adhering to a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. 
Resolving these issues often takes time. Applicant is doing his best to improve his 
family’s financial situation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s long and 
favorable employment history with several defense contractors. I considered that 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 2002. I considered his and his wife’s 
periods of unemployment and his support of two children. I note that Applicant and his 
wife transferred his daughter from a private school to a public school when they began 
to encounter financial problems. While Applicant encountered some financial problems 
over the past several years, he has taken steps to improve his financial situation. He 
has either paid or entered into repayment agreements with his creditors. Applicant 
resolved most of the debts and is working on his mortgage and student loan accounts.  
He demonstrated that he is committed to resolving his delinquent accounts and 
improving his financial situation. Security concerns under financial considerations are 
mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.bb:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
