 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08829 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant documentary evidence is insufficient to show a good-faith effort to 
resolve her financial problems, or that her financial problems are under control. The 
financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SCA) on March 16, 2015. 
She was interviewed by a government investigator on October 6, 2015. After reviewing 
the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 8, 2016, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on August 24, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on June 27, 2017. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 28, 2017, scheduling a hearing for July 12, 2017. At the hearing, the 
Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified and submitted two 
exhibits (AE) 1 and 2. All exhibits were admitted as evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2017. 
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Applicant’s notice of hearing was issued on June 28, 2017, and her hearing was 
convened on July 12, 2017. At hearing, she indicated she had sufficient time to prepare 
and was ready to proceed. She affirmatively waived her right to 15-day notice of 
hearing. (Tr. 12-13) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR financial considerations allegations (¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.u). After a thorough review of the record evidence, and having considered 
Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 2006. She attended college between 2006 and the fall of 2016, when she 
received her bachelor’s degree. Applicant has never been married, and she has no 
children.  
 
Applicant has been employed with different employers in diverse positions since 
June 2007. Between 2007 and 2011, she attended college and worked full time. Her 
current employer, a federal contractor, hired her for a full-time position in September 
2014. She has been working for the same employer and clearance sponsor since then. 
This is her first SCA. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2015 SCA asked her to disclose 
whether: she was currently delinquent on any federal debt (including financial 
obligations); during the preceding seven years had she defaulted in any type of loan; 
had bills or debts been turned over to collection agencies; had any account or credit 
card been suspended, charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; was she 
over 120 days delinquent on any debts; and was she currently 120 days delinquent on 
any debt.  
 
Applicant answered “Yes” and disclosed that she was seeking advice to raise her 
credit score, and that she had contacted her creditors and set up payment plans to 
repay her debts. Applicant disclosed only one credit card in collection (SOR ¶ 1.q (same 
as 1.r)). As explanation for her financial problems, she stated that she was young and 
immature and did not keep up with her financial responsibilities. She stated she had 
contacted a collection agency and had established a payment plan to repay her debt. 
(GE 1) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government background investigator in October 
2015. Applicant told the investigator that she had made an agreement with the creditor 
for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q to pay $120 monthly starting in January 2015. The 
money was to be withdrawn from her bank account electronically. She anticipated 
paying off the account by January 2016. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that 
the creditor obtained a judgment against her in February 2015. Applicant finished 
 
3 
 
 
paying the judgment in January 2016. (AE 2) She presented no documentary evidence 
of any payment agreements made with the creditor or that she made any payments 
pursuant to that agreement. Apparently, all payments to the creditor were made 
pursuant to a garnishment of wages enforcing the judgment obtained against Applicant. 
 
The investigator questioned Applicant about 16 student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.p), totaling about $49,000, that were in collection. Applicant acknowledged 
the student loans and stated that she had not made any payment on her student loans 
because she had no money to pay them, and she was just starting to get on her feet. 
She promised the investigator that she would contact the Department of Education to 
consolidate her loans and establish a payment plan. She claimed she had contacted the 
Department of Education in 2014, and was denied a deferment because she was not 
enrolled in college.  
 
Applicant had another credit account that was in collection (not alleged in the 
SOR). In 2014, she settled the debt and paid it. She told the investigator that she was 
going through the process of straightening out her credit because she wanted to 
purchase a home. She was becoming financially stable as a result of her income with 
her current employer. Applicant paid the delinquent traffic ticket alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s. 
She presented no documentary evidence showing the payment, but the account is no 
longer reflected in recent credit reports. 
 
Concerning the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.t and 1.u, Applicant explained that 
she contacted the creditor (same for both accounts) and was told she only had one 
account outstanding, SOR ¶ 1.u, and she paid it in October 27, 2015. I find SOR ¶¶ 1.t 
and 1.u alleged the same account. I find both allegations for Applicant.  
 
Applicant testified she contacted her bank and consolidated some of her 
consumer debts under a bank loan (car note, credit cards, etc.). She said she pays $85 
a month to the bank, and the bank pays her creditors. (Tr. 42-44) Applicant stated she 
was consulting with a real estate agent who is helping her to increase her credit score. 
She plans to buy a home in the near future. 
 
Applicant claimed her student loans were not delinquent when she submitted her 
2015 SCA because she had already established a rehabilitation and payment plan with 
a debt collection company. She stated that during the try out period of the student loan 
rehabilitation plan, she was paying $11 dollars monthly. (Tr. 46) She had completed the 
try out period for the rehabilitation plan, and her student loans had been consolidated 
and transferred back to the Department of Education, to whom she was making monthly 
payments. (Tr. 30-31) 
 
When asked to produce corroborating documentary evidence of the student loan 
consolidation agreement and about the monthly payments she had made, Applicant 
clarified that July 2017 was the first month in which she was going to make a payment 
to the Department of Education.  
 
 
4 
 
 
The application for consolidation of student loans form that Applicant attached to 
her SOR Answer is dated June 24, 2016. The date contradicts her hearing statement 
that the student loans were rehabilitated (not delinquent) in March 2015 when she 
submitted her SCA. Furthermore, the Financial Disclosure for Reasonable and 
Affordable Rehabilitation Payments form was not filed properly, it has numerous blank 
entries, and it was not signed by Applicant.  
 
Applicant attached to her SOR Answer 22 leave and earning statements covering 
the period from March 25, 2016 to August 19, 2016. The leave and earnings statements 
show a weekly garnishment of wages apparently secured for the repayment of one of 
her student loans. (SOR Answer) Applicant testified that after she established the 
payment plan with the Department of Education, the garnishment of wages stopped and 
she implied she immediately started making her monthly payments on line. 
 
I asked Applicant several times during her hearing to provide me with 
documentary evidence of her student loan consolidation agreement, the debt 
consolidation agreement she established with her bank, and a history of payments 
made under both agreements. Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence to 
support her claims. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
 
5 
 
 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. Between 
2006 and 2012, Applicant opened numerous student loans, totaling about $49,000, that 
became delinquent. She also had a number of delinquent consumer accounts that were 
in collection. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying 
 
6 
 
 
conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant settled and paid some delinquent accounts that were in collection in 
October 2015 and January 2016. She initially claimed she rehabilitated her student 
loans in 2015, before she submitted her SCA. She then claimed that the student loan 
rehabilitation took place in 2016, that after the rehabilitation, her student loans were 
consolidated, and that she was making payments to the Department of Education in 
2017.  
 
 Applicant owes a substantial student loan debt, and she has limited income. She 
failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to corroborate her claims that she 
rehabilitated her student loans and was making monthly payments on her student loans. 
Her documentary evidence is insufficient to show she resolved her student loans. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that her delinquent consumer accounts resulted from 
her lack of maturity, incurring expenses that she could not afford, and her lack of 
financial responsibility. I gave Applicant credit for repaying the delinquent consumer 
accounts alleged in the SOR. Notwithstanding, in light of the record as a whole, 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that she is paying her student loans 
and that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. She also did not 
present evidence to show that she received financial counseling, or that she follows a 
budget.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate financial responsibility and that her financial 
problems are being resolved and are under control. Her inconsistent testimony and the 
lack of documentary evidence corroborating her claims of student loans resolution 
create doubts about her evidence in mitigation and, ultimately, on her eligibility for a 
clearance. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.q - 1.u:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
