KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not review a case de novo.  Its authority to review a case is limited to
cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07517.a1
DATE: 03/08/2018
DATE: March 08, 2018
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07517
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
11, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
1
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On November 9, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge David M. White denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant requested that his case be decided on the written record and then did not respond
to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM).  On appeal, Applicant states that the various
tax liens and debts alleged in the SOR have now been removed from his credit reports, he has no
other delinquent accounts, and he is satisfying his debts monthly.  In support of his statement, he
attaches credit reports which post-date the Judge’s decision in his case.
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  Its authority to review a case is limited to cases in which
the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
04736 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2018).  Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the
part of the Judge.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale          
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
