 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-03914  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 30, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 27, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On February 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 13, 2017. He admitted all of allegations 
the SOR allegations, except for Subparagraph 1.g., regarding the alleged delinquent 
debts; with explanations, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative 
judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.) On March 30, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was mailed to Applicant on March 
31, 2017, and received by him on April 22, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM (Response) on May 16, 2017. He did not 
object to Items 1 through 8. Applicant also submitted additional information in his FORM 
Response, Items 1 through 3, to which Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017. Response Items 1 through 3 are admitted 
into evidence. Applicant’s Response to the FORM is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. (Item 5 at page 5.) He is married, with two adult 
children. (Item 5 at pages 18~19, and 21~23.) Applicant retired from active duty in the 
Army in July of 2006, with the rank of Colonel. (Item 5 at pages 14~16.) He attributes 
the admitted past-due indebtedness to a significant drop in income in 2011~2012, from 
about $260,000 to about $93,000 in 2013. (Answer at Tab A.) Through no fault of his 
own, Applicant, and 600 of his fellow employees, lost his “full-time consultant” position 
dealing with “government medical contracts.” (Id.) Despite this drop in income, Applicant 
has now addressed the admitted past-due debts. 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he had a past-due debt to Creditor A in the amount of 
about $19,541. Applicant has begun to make $50 payments towards this debt, which is 
listed as past-due in the amount of $10,701 on his May 2017 credit report. (Response, 
Item 1 at page 5, and Item 2 at page 3.) This is evidenced by his credit report, and by 
correspondence from the successor creditor A’s fiscal intermediary. (Id.) $50 is not an 
insignificant amount in light of Applicant’s drastic reduction in income.  I find that 
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this past-due debt. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits that he had a past-due debt to Creditor B in the amount of 
about $19,666. Applicant has begun to make $25 payments towards this debt, to the 
satisfaction of the successor creditor to this debt. (Response, Item 1 at page 6, and Item 
2 at page 1.) This is evidenced by his credit report, and by correspondence from the 
successor creditor. (Id.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address this 
past-due debt. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admits that he had a second past-due debt to Creditor B in the 
amount of about $25,096. Applicant has also begun to make $25 payments towards this 
debt, to the satisfaction of the successor creditor to this debt. (Response, Item 1 at page 
6, and Item 2 at page 2.) This is evidenced by his credit report, and by correspondence 
from the successor creditor. (Id.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to 
address this past-due debt. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he had a third past-due debt to Creditor B in the 
amount of about $7,422. Applicant has also begun to make $25 payments towards this 
debt, to the satisfaction of the successor creditor to this debt. (Response, Item 1 at page 
4, and Item 2 at page 1.) This is evidenced by his credit report, and by correspondence 
from the successor creditor. (Id.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to 
address this past-due debt. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admits that he had a past-due debt to Creditor E in the amount of 
about $2,376. Through counsel, Applicant is making a good-faith effort to ascertain the 
successor creditor to this debt, which is listed as past-due in the amount of $677 on his 
May 2017 credit report. (Response, Item 1 at page 8, and Item 3.) This is evidenced by 
his credit report, and by court documents. (Id.) I find that Applicant is making a good-
faith effort to address this past-due debt. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that he had a past-due debt to Creditor F in the amount of 
about $3,139. Through counsel, Applicant has settled this debt, which is not listed as 
past-due on his May 2017 credit report. (Response, Item 1 at page 7, and Item 3.) This 
is evidenced by his credit report, and by court documents. (Id.) I find that Applicant has 
resolved this past-due debt. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denies that he had a past-due debt to Creditor G in the amount of 
about $1,225. He avers that he settled this debt; and furthermore, it does not appear on 
his May 2017 credit report. (Response, Item 1.) I find that Applicant has settled this 
alleged debt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had significant past-due debts. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that were 
completely beyond his control, a substantial reduction of income in 2013, and there are 
clear indications that his financial issues are under control. He has since made a good-
faith effort to address all of his admitted past-due debts, and has settled the one debt he 
denied, Subparagraph 1.g. The record establishes clear mitigation of financial security 
concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(d), and 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a retired Army 
Colonel, who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues 
created by his significant reduction of income in 2013. The likelihood that financial 
problems will recur is minimal. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. 
He fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
