 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 16-00783 
        --------------------------                               )  
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 Appearances 
 
                 For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                                             For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K (Handling 
Protected Information) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant responded to 
the SOR on October 28, 2016. She answered all allegations and requested a hearing 
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge.  
 
On December 21, 2016, Department Council amended the SOR to add 
subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e under Guideline K, and to substitute subparagraph 2.b 
under Guideline E with a revised 2.b allegation. Applicant acknowledged the 
amendments on January 24, 2017. I was assigned the case on March 7, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 9, 
2017, setting the hearing for April 3, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. The AG has since been revised for any 
adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. The revised AG is applied here. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered three documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-3. Applicant offered testimony and four documents, accepted without objection 
as Exs. A-D. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 12, 2017, and the record was 
closed. Based on the exhibits, testimony, and record as a whole, I find Applicant failed 
to mitigate security concerns under Guideline K and Guideline E. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old security guard who has worked in the same position 
since 2008, during which time she also maintained a reserve (on-call) position as a file 
clerk from 2009 to 2012. She was first granted a security clearance in 2009. Applicant 
completed her formal education over a decade ago. At present, she is single and has 
two grown children. 
 
 As a security guard, Applicant works in two buildings. She works an eight-hour 
day on the second shift (3:00 p.m.-11:00 p.m.), patrolling her area every two hours. 
About 20 such areas have alarms for which Applicant is responsible during her shift. (Tr. 
21) She generally shuts down alarms around 3:00 p.m., at the beginning of her shift, as 
the first shift workers leave. Applicant was cited for failing to set an alarm, which means 
closing it, for Area I in about September 2014, for Area II in about November 2014, and 
Area III in about March 2015. (Tr. 22) Applicant is unsure how these cited violations of 
protocol occurred as she routinely rechecked alarms at the end of her shift.2  
 
 In January 2016, Applicant was interviewed while seeking renewal of her security 
clearance. Applicant mentioned she was cited for the September 2014 incident by an 
individual with whom she has some conflict, later noting: “We don’t really get along. It 
goes way back. It’s harassment and all kinds of stuff with [him] . . . . He’s just a regular 
security guard.” (Tr. 23) During that same interview, Applicant discussed the alleged 
November 2014 incident, which had been reported by a superior of Applicant’s own 
supervisor. (Tr. 23-24) The alleged violation from March 2015 was discovered by a 
different individual, an employee from the information technology (IT) department.  
 
 Applicant never learned of these alleged failures from those who supposedly 
found them or reported them. They were not discussed with her until after the third 
alleged incident, in March 2015. (Tr. 26) Her supervisor, at least twice, told her she 
needed to check all alarms. She was given a written warning that was placed in her 
personnel file. Applicant maintained that the first incident was the result of spite, as 
described, but that the more recent two instances were most likely caused by her failure 
to get prescription eyeglasses for work. Later, when completing a security clearance 
application (SCA) in April 2015, Applicant failed to note any, of these incidents in 
response to Section 13C: Employment Record, which asks, in part, whether, in the 
preceding seven years, she had received a warning, been officially reprimanded, 
                                                          
2 In general, one would learn of a failure to set an alarm in a particular area by whoever would relieve the 
individual for that night on the following day, consequently, the failure to set an alarm could have occurred 
during the second or the third shift. (Tr. 22) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
suspended, or disciplined for misconduct at work. She answered “no” due to her haste 
and oversight.3 (Tr. 74-75)  
 
Applicant knew she had sight problems and lacked prescription eyewear at the 
time of the incidents. (Tr. 32, 36) Without reliable spectacles with the proper correction, 
Applicant’s poor eyesight made it difficult for her to maneuver her computer’s mouse 
properly on her computer, a step essential to setting the alarm.4 (Tr. 27) In response, 
Applicant’s supervisor told her to get glasses. (Tr. 28) In blaming her poor eyesight, 
Applicant is unable to explain how she was able to set the alarms the vast majority of 
the time. (Tr. 32-34) She maintains that these failures were not her fault, stating “they’re 
just blaming it on me.” (Tr. 33-34) She cannot explain how the alarms were not set. (Tr. 
34) She admitted that she relied on her shift partner to help her set the alarms, but 
knows that she was responsible for performing her own work. (Tr. 37) 
 
In November 2015, Applicant was counseled and given a warning regarding her 
need to treat all co-workers with respect and dignity, and advising that profanity should 
not be directed at another employee. This warning arose from an incident in which 
Applicant, outside the workplace, had an ugly spat via text with a new employee that 
she knew through her daughter. (Tr. 62) The texts concerned personal matters. 
Somehow, a printout of the texting was passed on to her supervisor, leading to a 
meeting on the issue. Applicant signed the warning letter.  
 
In December 2015, Applicant was given a second warning notice after taking 
pictures inside her company’s premises, despite being warned, verbally and in writing, 
that photography was not permitted in the building. That same policy was posted in the 
building lobby. This warning was received after Applicant took a “selfie” picture of 
herself in the restroom and posted it on Facebook. Someone, who Applicant claims 
does not like her, saw the picture and reported it.  (Tr. 40) As a result of that and a few 
other matters, Applicant was put on unpaid leave from work for three or four weeks. (Tr. 
41-42) These repercussions made her feel unfairly treated. (Tr. 41) Applicant feels that 
way because “it happens all the time . . . . I’m just singled out.” (Tr. 41)  
 
In December 2016, Applicant received a third warning letter. This time it was for 
leaving her post unattended for five to nine minutes while on duty.5 (Tr. 43-45) At the 
time, she was the sole guard on duty. (Tr. 44) She knew her post had to be continuously 
manned in order to respond to alarms and receive or make emergency calls. Her act 
constituted a violation of the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual 
(NISPOM) section 5-902. Her violation was reported to the government. Because of the 
way the matter was handled, so close to her being advised of this process, Applicant 
                                                          
3  Applicant concedes the events should have been fresh in her mind, and apologizes for the incorrect 
answer. (Tr. 76) 
 
4 Applicant noted that the workstation had a drawer with ready-made eyeglasses one could use, 
assuming one could find a pair with the proper strength. (Tr. 36-37) 
 
5 The notice reports that Applicant was gone eight to nine minutes, while she suggests it was about five. 
 
 
 
 
4 
feels she has been singled out for her action. (Tr. 46-47) She claims she was not at her 
station, but was still in the vicinity of her station.6 (Tr. 47-48) Applicant reported that this 
commonly occurred and that she is just being “picked” upon, even though she explained 
her position to her supervisor. (Tr. 49, 53) She did not raise the issue later with her 
supervisor’s superior because she feared more trouble. (Tr. 49)  
 
Also in the meeting concerning the December 2016 warning, Applicant was cited 
for failing to follow company policy by removing material from the company’s facility. 
The material at issue was some foam that she wanted to give to her granddaughter to 
use in the pool. (Tr. 54-55) She thought she was free to take what was marked as spare 
foam without a property pass. Since it was by a big bin on the loading dock, she 
believed it was trash. (Tr. 55) She believes she was cited with this infraction because 
she is being singled out. (Tr. 55)  
 
Applicant has never appealed any of the warnings for which she feels she was 
being singled out or picked on. She signed each warning letter acknowledging the cited 
security lapse. She always felt she was compelled to sign the warning letters. (See, 
e.g., Tr. 67) She is somewhat confused about all the facts. (Tr. 69, 71) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. The AG 
requires that any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. In addition, an applicant is responsible for 
                                                          
6 Elsewhere, Applicant stated, “No, I wasn’t even at work then,” in response to the comment: “[the 
warning letter] states that the incident of being away from your post happened in August 2016.” She was 
then directed during the hearing to where she had signed and acknowledged the written warning. (Tr. 47) 
 
 
 
 
5 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K – Handling Protected Information 
 
The concern under this guideline, set forth at AG ¶ 33, is that the deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for handling protected information-
which includes classified and other sensitive government information, and proprietary 
information-raises doubt about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
 
Under AG ¶ 34: the conditions that could potentially raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this matter are:  
 
AG ¶ 34(g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified 
or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 34(h): negligence or lax security practices that persist despite 
counseling by management.  
 
On three occasions, Applicant failed to set an alarm in an assigned area. While 
she now denies these events, blaming either her poor eyesight or a conspiracy against 
her, she acknowledged her failures in signing the related warning letters. Thereafter, 
she failed to appeal these disciplinary measures. It appears that it was only with the 
third warning, regarding March 2015, that she was finally counseled to resolve the 
problem and get eyeglasses, which she did. Applicant subsequently violated policy 
again by photographing herself within the secure complex and by leaving her guard 
station unattended. These incidents give rise to AG ¶ 34(g) and AG ¶ 34(h). 
 
Under AG ¶ 35, the following mitigating conditions could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 35(a): so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has 
happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 35(b): the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities;  
 
AG ¶ 35(c): the security violations were due to improper or inadequate 
training or unclear instructions; and  
 
AG ¶ 35(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is 
no evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern.  
 
          Applicant was last given a warning in December 2016, a little more than a year 
ago. It was the last of multiple warnings within three years. Each incident was the result 
of simple carelessness, oversight, or negligence, not some complex circumstance that 
requires deeper investigation. Applicant has not received remedial training, nor has she 
relented in believing she was being “picked” upon by management, a stance she has 
never asserted through an appeal. The policies she violated appear to have been rather 
basic and obvious, with one being clearly posted in the building’s lobby. While each of 
her lapses may have been inadvertent, there is no documentary evidence indicating she 
promptly reported her failings. Given her pattern of security and personnel failings, none 
of the available mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Here, Applicant committed the security lapses noted under the preceding 
section, concedes she engaged in a texting dispute with a co-worker, and has admitted 
she incorrectly answered “no” on an SCA, in which she was asked whether she had 
ever been given a warning at her workplace in the preceding seven years. Therefore, 
the following disqualifying condition applies: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 This guideline provides seven potential mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17. Two 
are potentially applicable under these facts: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 Under these facts, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because there is no evidence 
Applicant preemptively disclosed her violations of policy, abusive texts, or inaccurate 
SCA answer. It is noted, however, that Applicant appeared genuinely sincere when she 
attributed her incorrect SCA answer to haste, not intentional falsity.  
 
 Between 2014 and 2016, Applicant’s policy violations left the facility, owned by a 
defense contractor, unsecure. Alarms were left unset, the guard station was left 
unmanned for several minutes, and company property was removed without 
authorization from a superior. These are serious lapses that should have been easily 
prevented by the simple exercise of appropriate job-related diligence. Here, however, 
they occurred through basic thoughtless or careless action. With no showing of 
additional training or some other effort for her to better understand the policies 
underlying the need for security guards at Applicant’s place of employment, I cannot 
find either mitigating condition applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s security lapses and mishandling 
of information, I considered her life, candor at the hearing, and various explanations. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old security guard who has worked in the same position 
since 2008. She was first granted a security clearance in 2009. She is single and has 
two grown children. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Between 2014 and 2016, Applicant had multiple citations for failing to follow 
company or government policy in the execution of her position as a security guard. 
Leaving alarms unset, leaving her station unattended, and photographing the interior of 
a secure complex, in particular, made her company vulnerable. Her texting to a fellow 
employee, while outside of work, still demonstrated inappropriate behavior for a 
company employee in her position.  
 
At times, Applicant denies performing the lapse cited, while at other times she 
maintains that she is being singled out as part of a conspiracy. There seems to be a 
reluctance to take responsibility for her action, yet a continued avoidance of appealing 
the disciplinary measures taken against her. Her inability to consistently deny or admit 
the allegations waged against her only leads to a state of confusion as to her position. 
In turn, this raises doubts about her reliability and trustworthiness. Therefore, handling 
protected information and personal conduct security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
