 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-00301 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
       For Applicant: Kathryn Donnelly, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On June 13, 2016, Applicant 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on February 
22, 2017. A hearing scheduled on March 3, 2017, for April 4, 2017, was cancelled when 
Applicant retained counsel and an extension was requested. The matter was 
rescheduled on May 10, 2017, for a June 13, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered seven documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-7. Applicant gave testimony, 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. The AG have since been amended. The 
present AG applicable for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017, are applied here. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
introduced two witnesses, and offered 22 documents, accepted without objection as 
Exs. A-V. The record was left open through July 7, 2017, to provide the parties with 
sufficient time to submit additional materials. On July 7, 2017, Applicant submitted a file 
supplemented with four attached enclosures. It was accepted as Ex. W without 
objection. A transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on July 12, 2017, and the 
record was closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old configuration management principal leader who has 
worked for the same entity for about four years. She has earned a bachelor’s degree. 
She is married with three children.  
 
 In 1990, Applicant and her husband bought a new home in which they lived for 
about two years. In 1992, Applicant inherited a townhouse. She and her husband 
moved into the inherited property and, because their own home had declined in value, 
decided to turn it into a rental property.  
 
 In 2005, Applicant’s husband was unemployed for about four months, straining 
their ability to pay their credit card bills. During this time, the couple took an investing 
course. Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant and her husband lost about $30,000 in 
funds drawn from their retirement accounts through day and weekly stock trading.  
 
Meanwhile, the home purchased in 1990 remained a rental property until 2009, 
when Applicant and her husband moved back into the home while selling the inherited 
property and looking for a new house to purchase. Within a year, they moved into a 
newer home and began renting the first property again. For a number of years, they had 
good, reliable tenants.  
 
By 2010, the real estate market had declined, the rental home’s value had been 
reduced, and good tenants were hard to find. Eventually, a young couple with a small 
child moved into the house in the fall of 2010. About a year later, after several 
complaints from neighbors, Applicant investigated the home. The tenants had vacated 
the house and left it destroyed. (Tr. 28-32) It took a considerable amount of time and 
financial resources to repair the home. Costs ran as high as $15,000. (Tr. 62) As a 
consequence, Applicant and her husband fell behind on the mortgage.2 (Tr. 31) 
Meanwhile, Applicant’s husband was unemployed from late 2012 until June 2013, then 
again starting in April 2016 to date.  
 
In 2013, Applicant and her husband spoke with the property’s mortgage servicing 
company, hoping to discover what sum could be paid to get back on track with their 
                                                          
2 Between 2010-2011, Applicant and her husband met with a bankruptcy attorney due to rising credit card 
obligations, but they decided to have their lawyer negotiate with their creditors for better terms. (Tr. 44) In 
this manner, some of the debts were negotiated and ultimately paid with money withdrawn from their 
retirement accounts. (Tr. 44) 
 
 
 
 
3 
mortgage payments. The servicing company’s representative instead recommended 
that they apply for a certain program, the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP). 
 
Applicant’s husband stated that the program would not accept a property that 
was rental in nature, and noted that they made too much money. The representative 
urged them to try anyway, and they did. The process was fraught with delays and 
extensions by the servicer. Eventually, they were told they could pay about $16,000 and 
catch up on their payment schedule. Applicant remitted payment, but the check was 
returned with a note stating the amount due was $21,000. (Tr. 35) Frustrated by further 
problems, Applicant’s husband decided to walk away from the rental property, knowing 
it would reflect badly on their credit reports. (Tr. 36) 
 
As far as Applicant and her husband were concerned, they were through with the 
rental property. They never heard anything from the servicer again. Then, in 2016, they 
started receiving court papers concerning the property. At a hearing, it was determined 
that the mortgage had been improperly transferred to a newer entity. At the same time, 
the previous mortgagor was no longer in business. Then, the servicer changed, with the 
new servicing agent no longer accepting payments.  
 
More confusion transpired until Applicant was again asked to apply for a loan 
remodification in December 2016. (Tr. 38-39) The process this time was also fraught 
with difficulties and poor communication. (Tr. 39) Applicant has since been told that the 
house went into foreclosure, the property went to auction, and, with no bidders, the 
bank had bought the home in April 2017, but she has seen no documentation to that 
effect. (Tr. 42, 65) Citing to irregularities in this process, Applicant has filed a complaint 
with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). (Ex. W, Encl. 1) Applicant is 
still awaiting documentation regarding the auction or some other documents regarding 
the status of the house and her associated liability, if any. (Tr. 42-43) According to the 
credit report underlying the SOR, the account is past-due by $40,776 with a total loan 
balance of $120,522. (SOR 1.a) 
 
Also at issue in the SOR, based on Applicant’s credit report, are the following: 
 
1.b – Charged-off account ($2,543) – No evidence of payment - This account is a 
duplicate of the account noted below at 1.l. (Ex. W at 1-3). Applicant’s husband testified 
that this account was previously settled, but provided no documentary evidence 
indicating such payment or a reduction of balance to zero. 
 
1.c – Medical delinquent account ($1,880) – Unpaid. Applicant’s health insurer 
authorized an experimental treatment for pelvic pain. When the insurer later refused to 
cover the medicine used in the procedure, she appealed. She lost her appeal and the 
insurer denied the entire claim. No documentary evidence of further action by Applicant 
was submitted. She is presently unable to make payments on the account. (Tr. 87) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
1.d – Medical delinquent account ($1,312) – Unpaid. Applicant’s health insurer 
authorized an experimental treatment for pelvic pain. When the insurer later refused to 
cover the medicine used in the procedure, she appealed. She lost her appeal and the 
insurer denied the entire claim. No evidence of further action was submitted by 
Applicant. She is presently unable to make payments on the account. (Tr. 87) 
 
1.e – Collection account – ($1,153) – Settled. This account is a duplicate 
account. See adverse judgment at 1.m, below. 
 
1.f – 1.j – Medical delinquent accounts ($1,523) – Unpaid. These medical debts 
are related to the experimental treatment noted above, and emergency treatment in 
2015 for her son’s appendicitis. Applicant is currently researching these accounts. She 
is presently unable to make payments on the debts related to her treatment. (Tr. 87) 
 
1.k – Adverse judgment ($9,506) – Settled. This case was settled and dismissed 
with a reduced balance, which was cancelled in April 2011. (Ex. W at 10-11) Applicant 
received a 1099-C form for the settled amount cancelled, ($2,566). (Ex. W at 12)  
 
1.l – Adverse judgment ($2,461) – Duplicate account. See 1.b, above. 
 
1.m – Adverse judgment ($3,571) – Settled. Applicant provided evidence that this 
debt was cancelled and a 1099-C form issued. (Ex. W at 15-17)  
 
1.n – Failure to pay 2013 federal taxes – Paid. Applicant provided documentation 
in the form of her 2013 tax transcript that showed she set up an installment plan and 
satisfied her 2013 income taxes before the SOR was issued. (Ex. G; Ex. W at 16-17; 
Ex. W, Encl. 3) 
 
At present, Applicant is a registered substitute teacher who was poised to start 
work in the fall of 2017. She also has a pending job offer from a defense contractor that 
offers a lucrative salary. She recently submitted another HARP loan application, hoping 
to modify the mortgage on her residence. She plans to withdraw funds now reserved in 
her retirement account to pay the mortgage when the HARP application is resolved.3 
(Ex. W) 
 
Meanwhile, money remains tight. Applicant is about six-and-a-half months behind 
on her residential mortgage. (Tr. 96) Applicant conceded that she and her husband are 
living paycheck-to-paycheck. (Tr. 93) She stated, “I’m concentrating on paying our 
current debts, our current obligations, I don’t have the funds to go backwards and settle 
these [older] debts [at issue here].” (Tr. 92) Thus far, she has met monthly expense 
successfully. (Tr. 94) Her strategy is to work her way chronologically backward and 
address her old bills when she starts to accrue enough money to pay them. (Tr. 92) She 
has not received financial counseling.   
                                                          
3 Elsewhere, Applicant stated, “I don’t have any retirement savings because I’ve been using that to pay off 
our mortgage.” (Tr. 93) 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions shall in no sense be a determination as to 
the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant had 
acquired significant delinquent debt and that she had not timely paid her 2013 federal 
taxes. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.   
 
Under these facts, four conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
  
           As a threshold matter, I note that there is nothing exceptionally unique about the 
multiple debts at issue, some of which remain unaddressed, obviating application of AG 
¶ 20(a). The medical problems, a bad tenant, and Applicant’s husband’s periods of 
unemployment potentially raise AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant, however, provided insufficient 
information reflecting that she acted responsibly at the time except with regard to the 
rental property, raising that mitigating condition only in part. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply 
because Applicant has not received financial counseling.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
           To Applicant’s credit, she has endured multiple obstacles with regard to the 
mortgage referenced in SOR allegation 1.a. However, despite her efforts, she was 
unable to present documentation reflecting the status of the property at this time. 
Applicant’s husband is sure the debt at 1.b (and its duplicate 1.l) has been settled. The 
debts at 1.c-1.d and 1.f-1.j are medical in nature. Applicant bluntly conceded that she 
simply lacks the funds at present to pay these bills, which amount to about $4,700, but 
noted likely prospects for employment in the near future. She settled the debts at 1.e, 
1.k, and 1.m (a duplicate of 1.e), representing about $10,700 in debt. And she offered 
proof her 2013 federal taxes were paid by 2014, despite the SOR alleging it remained 
unpaid as of the time of the 2016 SOR. Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 20(d) and AG 
¶ 20(g) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old configuration management principal leader who has 
earned a bachelor’s degree. She is a highly credible and earnest individual. She is 
married with three children. Applicant has acquired considerable delinquent debt. Health 
issues, a bad tenant, periods of unemployment adversely affecting the family coffers, 
and cumbersome dealings with mortgagors have contributed to Applicant’s acquisition 
of delinquent debt. 
 
Despite many frustrations related to her interactions with the banks and 
mortgagors involved in the disposition of the property noted at allegation 1.a, which 
represents the lion’s share of the unresolved debt at issue, Applicant has made notable 
progress. She offered documentary evidence that she has paid or settled the debts at 
1.e/m, 1.k, and 1.n. She addressed her tax issue promptly and appropriately. Applicant 
was highly credible and reflective in giving her testimony and in assessing her financial 
situation. It may take time, but I am convinced Applicant will eventually resolve her 
financial problems.4  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) and ISCR Case No. 09-08462) at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 31, 2011): “Depending on the facts of a given case, the fact that an applicant’s debts will not be 
paid off for a long tine, in and of itself, may be of limited security concern.” 
 
 
 
 
8 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:5   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Allegation 1.b is a duplicate of allegation 1.l and allegation 1.e is a duplicate of allegation 1.m. 
 
 
