 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03686 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 12, 2018 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. His ongoing history of indebtedness and failure to timely file 
and pay Federal and state income tax obligations remain a concern. National security 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 6, 2017, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2017. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
August 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 26, 2017. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two witnesses, and presented 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M, which were admitted.1 DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on October 10, 2017. The record was left open for the receipt of 
additional evidence until January 22, 2018. On January 19, 2018, AE N through AE U, 
were submitted and received without objection.2 The record closed as scheduled on 
January 22, 2018. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions3 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG promulgated in SEAD 
4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a through 1.g, 1.s, 1.z, 1.dd, and 1.ee, with 
explanations. He denied SOR allegations 1.h through 1.r, 1.t though 1.y, 1.aa through 
1.cc, and 1.ff through 1.hh. After a thorough and careful review of the testimony, 
pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, and is divorced. He has three daughters; one is 21 years 
old, and his twins are 14 years old. He is currently employed by a Government contractor, 
for whom he has worked since December 2014. However, he has been in the same 
position, employed by other contractors, since 2007. He served in the Marine Corps from 
April 1992 to 2006, and received an honorable discharge. He graduated with a bachelor’s 
degree in 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 57-59, 82-87.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his 2010 divorce. Leading up to 
his separation from his spouse in 2010, Applicant was a responsible homeowner with no 
delinquent debt. His divorce was contentious and he documented extensive harassment 
on the part of his ex-wife. He initially had to pay $4,000 a month in child support. She also 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel objected to AE G, because it lacked authentication. It was admitted over her 
objection. (Tr. 23-24.) 
2 Applicant marked his post-hearing exhibits A through G. They were remarked to avoid confusion.  
3 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
withdrew $10,000 from their joint account, leaving Applicant in immediate financial 
distress. Additionally, Applicant had significant expenses related to the legal fees for the 
divorce and unrelated dental services for his children. (AE A; AE B; AE D; AE E; AE F; 
AE L; Tr. 59-73, 88.) 
 
 In January 2018, Applicant hired a non-profit debt management company (DMC) 
to assist him in resolving his delinquent debt. (AE P.) His budget as of January 2018 
showed $3,288 in monthly income, with $3,605 in living expenses. He has a net worth of 
negative $10,304. (AE P.) The payment plan calls for monthly payments of $180.36 to be 
automatically withdrawn from Applicant’s bank account each month through April 2019. 
While the record includes a plan for automatic withdrawals from Applicant’s account, the 
record shows no payments under this plan. Applicant indicated that he planned to pay 
more than the minimum payments to the DMC to expedite the resolution of his debts. He 
reduced his living expenses recently by moving in with his girlfriend thereby lowering his 
rent, and by successfully petitioning his state court to reduce his child support payments. 
He also works overtime to earn additional income. (AE J; AE L; AE N; AE P; AE T; AE 
U.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent student loan in the amount of $17,349, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. Applicant’s discussed this debt with his non-profit 
credit counselor with the DMC, who recommended he initiate a payment plan. He intends 
to follow this advice, but had not yet made any payment arrangements at the close of the 
record. It is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 88-91.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $12,215, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. Applicant indicated, “this debt was ordered as 
community property from the divorce and with the help of [DMC], this debt has been 
disputed and deleted from [the] credit report.” However, he failed to document that 
dispute. This debt is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 91-92.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $8,343, as alleged 
in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant indicated, “this debt was ordered as community 
property from the divorce and with the help of [DMC], this debt has been disputed and 
deleted from [the] credit report.” However, he failed to document that dispute and 
resolution. This debt is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 91-92.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent collection account in the amount of $5,858, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant claimed that this debt “was incorrectly 
overcharged” from his first divorce attorney and “with the help of [DMC], this debt has 
been disputed and deleted from [the] credit report.” However, he failed to document that 
dispute and resolution. This debt is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 93.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent student loan in the amount of $4,354, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant indicated he intended to consolidate his 
delinquent student loans into one debt. He intended to negotiate a payment arrangement. 
 
4 
 
 
However, he did not provide documentation that he took any action on this debt. It is 
unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 93.) 
Applicant is indebted on a judgment in the amount of $4,220, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.f. This judgment was filed in January 2013. Applicant indicated, “this debt 
was ordered as community property from the divorce and with the help of [DMC], this debt 
has been disputed and deleted from [the] credit report.” However, he failed to document 
that dispute and resolution. This debt is unresolved. (GE 5; AE O; Tr. 94.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on another delinquent student loan in the amount of $2,817, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. Applicant indicated he intended to consolidate his 
delinquent student loans, as discussed above. He intended to negotiate a payment 
arrangement with this creditor. However, he did not provide documentation that he took 
any action on this debt. It is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 94-95.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $581, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.h. He denied this was his debt and claimed “with the help of [DMC], 
this item has been removed from [the] credit report.” However, he failed provide 
documentation to support this claim. This debt is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 94-95.) 
 
Applicant is alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.i, 1.aa, and 1.bb, to be indebted to a 
creditor on three separate debts in the amounts of $535, $205, and $147, respectively. 
These debts were medical bills for Applicant’s children. Applicant incorporated these 
debts into his plan with the DMC. These debts are unresolved. (AE O; AE P; Tr. 98.) 
 
Applicant is alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.j through 1.r, 1.t, and 1.u, to be 
indebted to the same collection agent for those 11 debts that total $2,206. These debts 
were medical bills for Applicant’s children. Applicant incorporated these debts into his 
plan with the DMC. These debts are unresolved. (AE O; AE P; Tr. 96-97.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a telephone company in the amount of $92, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 1.s. Applicant indicated he intended to resolve this debt, but provided 
no documentation to substantiate his claim. It is unresolved. (AE O; Tr. 96.) 
 
Applicant is alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.v through 1.y, to be indebted to the 
same collection agent for these four debts that total $2,307. According to Applicant, his 
DMC “was not able to have any direct information about this account of Jan[uary] 2nd as 
this account did not show up on their system.” Applicant has contacted the creditor and 
asked for documentation on each of these debts. He plans to incorporate them into his 
debt management plan with DMC. These debts are not resolved. (AE O; Tr. 96-97.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to his state taxation authority in the approximate amount of 
$11,415, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.z. A tax lien was filed against him for that 
amount in January 2017. Applicant indicated that this debt was “based off of not 
filing/fraudulent filing/incorrect filing of taxes.” He further indicated that the amount owed 
had been reduced after amended returns were filed. He requested a “tax abatement for 
 
5 
 
 
financial hardship” from his state taxation authority, but did not provide evidence of the 
abatement being granted. This debt is unresolved. (GE 5; AE O; AE K; Tr. 97-98.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a city in the approximate amount of 
$529, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.cc. Applicant disputes this debt as it was 
incurred at Applicant’s former residence in 2014, and he has not lived there since 2010. 
He indicated the debt belonged solely to his ex-wife and that he would address the issue 
in court. He provided a statement from this creditor showing the debt was incurred in 2014 
to substantiate this dispute. (AE O; AE S; Tr. 98.)  
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent in the approximate amount of $525, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.dd. This is a medical debt that has been included in his 
DMC debt management plan. However, no payments have been documented under that 
plan. It is unresolved. (AE O; AE P; Tr. 98.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent in the approximate amount of $95, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.ee. Applicant indicated his intent was to pay this debt in 
full at the end of January 2018. He presented no documentation to show it is resolved. 
(AE O; Tr. 100-101.)  
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent in the approximate amount of $71 and 
$25, respectively, as alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.ff and 1.gg. These are medical 
debts that have been included in his DMC debt management plan. However, no payments 
have documented under that plan. They are unresolved. (AE O; AE P.) 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state tax returns as required for tax 
years 2010 through 2014. He disclosed his failure to file Federal and state income taxes 
for tax years 2010 through 2014 on his June 2015 security clearance application. (GE 1.) 
During his June 2016 security clearance interview, he expanded the years to include 
failure to file for tax year 2015. (GE 2.) However, he denied this allegation in his Answer. 
He claimed that “all tax years have been filed” and that he was “currently working with 
[his] tax accountant to correct all submitted/filed tax returns.” (AE O.) He documented that 
his ex-wife used an invalid power of attorney to file their 2009 Federal and state tax 
returns, and she cashed the refund checks without his approval. (AE C.) He documented 
he has been diligently working on his tax issues since they started in 2010, but selected 
a tax service that went out of business after taking $5,000, but failing to file his returns. 
(AE G; AE H.) Applicant presented a letter from his current tax accountant, emailed to 
him on January 17, 2018, which reflects: 
 
I have been working with [Applicant] for the past two years on his tax issues. 
At this point in time, [Applicant] has filed all tax years up to 2016, and has 
submitted an extension for the tax year 2016. Two amended tax filings for 
2014 and 2015 have been submitted and I currently have [Applicant’s] 2016 
tax year file ready to submit. I anticipate that we will be filing the 2016 tax 
return before the end of the week. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
My knowledge of [Applicant’s] tax issues are as follows: 
 
In 2012 [Applicant] was victim of identity theft and someone fraudulently 
filed his 2011 tax return and electronically received the refund without 
[Applicant’s] knowledge. This action flagged [Applicant] with the IRS. 
 
According to [Applicant], in 2013 he hired a company to help him resolve 
his issue and was unsuccessful in its resolution. 
 
I am hoping that with the new amendment request and 2016 tax form filing 
that [Applicant] will be able to have a final tax estimate in which we can 
negotiate a repayment plan. (AE R.) 
 
Applicant had previously been granted an extension to file his 2016 Federal and state 
income tax returns. Applicant does not know how much he owes in Federal taxes. (AE G; 
Tr. 74-77, 101-104.)  
 
Two witnesses spoke on Applicant’s behalf. Both testified about Applicant’s 
contentious divorce and indicated Applicant is hardworking and trustworthy. (Tr. 26-56.) 
Applicant presented a letter from his site lead that indicated Applicant has kept his 
company informed of his financial problems and is actively attempting to manage his 
delinquencies. (AE Q.) Applicant is considered to be a “great asset” to his company. In 
another letter, his director indicated “his handling of classified material has been above 
reproach” (AE M.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
7 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations. He failed to timely 
file his Federal and state income tax returns, as required by law, for years 2010 through 
2014. He also had 33 unresolved delinquent debts, including his delinquent state tax debt, 
which total over $73,000. There is sufficient evidence to raise substantial security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
9 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial delinquencies is demonstrated by his current and 
old unresolved debts. He admits he failed to timely file and pay Federal and state income 
tax obligations. He has numerous SOR-alleged unresolved delinquent accounts. While 
he has a plan to resolve some of them, he has not documented any payments under that 
plan. His debt is ongoing and casts doubt on his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a series of events, including his 
divorce, legal fees, identity theft, and dental bills. These were conditions beyond his 
control. However, the record lacks documentation to show he reasonably and responsibly 
addressed his delinquencies while they were accumulating. He did not have the funds 
available to make payments on them, so he ignored the debts he knew about. Full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not established.  
 
 Applicant provided documentation that he has contracted with a DMC to attempt 
to resolve some of his debts. They provided him financial counseling on how to best 
manage and resolve his delinquent debts, given his budget. They also counseled him on 
how to negotiate with his creditors and establish repayment plans. His credit counseling 
offers partial mitigation, however because no payments have been documented to the 
DMC or to the creditors, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that his problem is 
under control or that he is making a good-faith effort to repay his remaining creditors. The 
evidence does not establish full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d) concerning his 
overall financial situation.  
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence of a reasonable basis to dispute his debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.cc. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt. However, he failed to establish mitigation 
with respect to the other debts he claimed to have disputed, because he did not document 
the basis of his dispute. 
 
 Applicant provided a letter from his accountant, which claimed that Applicant had 
filed “all tax years up to 2016.” However, the documentation provided does not prove that 
Applicant’s Federal and state taxes are being paid or otherwise resolved. He did not fully 
mitigate the Government’s concern under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 46 years old. He 
served honorably in the Marine Corps for 14 years. He is respected by his employer for 
his hard work and is considered trustworthy. His financial problems occurred largely due 
to his contentious divorce. Since 2010, he has been unable to recover from the turmoil 
that divorce caused in his financial life. While he has made significant strides in filing his 
delinquent taxes, and has hired a DMC to help him with his consumer and medical debts, 
he has not established a track record of responsibly managing and resolving delinquent 
debts or repairing his credit. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence about his 
overall financial stability from which to determine that further tax problems or financial 
delinquencies are unlikely. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.bb:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1cc:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.dd through 1.hh: Against Applicant 
   
  
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
