 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01879 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence security concerns arising from 
his continuing family connections in Ethiopia, but no Foreign Preference concerns were 
raised. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 16, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 18, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and 
C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 13, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 13, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2017, setting the hearing for May 15, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibit (GE) 1 into evidence. Applicant 
testified but offered no documentary evidence. I took administrative notice of the facts 
concerning Ethiopia that are set forth on pages 2 through 4 of the Government’s 
Request for Administrative Notice, which is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) II and included 
in the record.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is married with two young children who were born in 
the United States. He was born and lived in Ethiopia until age 29. He graduated from an 
Ethiopian university before coming to the United States, and earned a U.S. bachelor’s 
degree in aviation maintenance management in 2014. He came to the United States in 
2001 on a business visa, was subsequently awarded refugee status, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2010. He has been employed by a major U.S. 
aerospace company since June 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 38, 50-53.) 
 
 Applicant sought, and was granted, refugee status because he was threatened 
with arrest and persecution due to his significant anti-government activities as a 
member of an ethnic-based liberation organization in his native region of Ethiopia. 
Although he made multi-week trips to Ethiopia in 2010 and 2015 to visit family and 
friends, he testified that he does not intend to return to that country because the 
ongoing ethnic turmoil, mass arrests, and daily killings in his native region would pose 
an undue risk to himself and his family. The home that he owns and all of his financial 
assets are located in the United States. (Tr. 38, 49-53, 59-60.) 
 
 Applicant sponsored his mother to come to the United States, and she obtained 
permanent resident status. However, she has returned to Ethiopia, where he thinks that 
she will continue to live while visiting him in the United States on occasion. She lives 
with Applicant’s two half-brothers who are her children, and is caring for the younger 
one. He also has a half-brother who is an Ethiopian citizen but permanent U.S. resident, 
and two half-brothers who are resident citizens of Ethiopia from his father’s side of the 
family. Of five half-sisters from his father’s side of the family, two have died and the 
remaining three are resident citizens of Ethiopia. He has little to no contact with any of 
his half-siblings on his father’s side, but keeps in close touch with his mother and the 
two brothers who live with her. None of these family members have ever worked for the 
Ethiopian government. (GE 1; Tr. 35-46.)    
 
 
 
                                            
1 HE I is the Government’s Exhibit Index. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are also resident citizens of Ethiopia. They are retired, 
and Applicant does not know what employment they formerly held. He and his wife 
“sometimes send money to support them.” (Tr. 39.) He also sends money to help 
support his mother in Ethiopia. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 During Applicant’s 2015 visit to Ethiopia, he purchased an identity card that 
showed he was born there and functioned as a multi-visit entry visa when used with his 
U.S. passport. This was neither an Ethiopian passport nor an indication of continuing 
Ethiopian citizenship, which Applicant renounced when he became a U.S. citizen. 
Although the card was supposed to be valid for entry into Ethiopia for five years, 
Applicant was informed unofficially that the government had cancelled this program and 
the card would no longer be recognized. He never applied to renew the Ethiopian 
passport he used to initially enter the United States in 2001, which expired years ago. 
(GE 1; Tr. 29-34, 47-48.) 
   
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
publications concerning the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, as outlined on 
pages 2 through 4 of HE II, including the following: Ethiopia is in a declared State of 
Emergency, including provisions permitting government arrest of individuals without 
court order for activities that might otherwise be considered routine. The State 
Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel there due to civil unrest and anti-
government protests. Terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida affiliate Al-Shabaab 
present a continuing threat of attacks, kidnapping, assassinations, and hijackings 
against U.S. citizens and interests there. The most significant human rights violations 
include harassment and intimidation of opposition members and supporters. (HE II.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
 
 
 
4 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order adverse to 
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two of them are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 
and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Ethiopia is in a declared State of Emergency with the government exercising 
extra-judicial measures against perceived members and supporters of insurgent 
opposition groups. In addition, anti-U.S. terrorist organizations are present and active. 
Applicant fled Ethiopia to escape arrest and persecution for anti-government activities 
by an organization of which he was known to be an active member. These facts place a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his connections and 
relationships with family members, who are resident citizens of Ethiopia, do not create a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or pose a security risk. Applicant’s immediate family 
relationships are presumed to be close and loving. Applicant offered no evidence 
contrary with respect to his mother, two half-brothers who live with her, and parents-in-
law; although he has no contact with the half-siblings from his father’s side of the family. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), shifting 
the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
                                            
2The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant demonstrated that it is unlikely that he could be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or government and those 
of the United States as a consequence of his virtually non-existent relationships with the 
two half-brothers and three surviving half-sisters from his father’s side of the family who 
reside in Ethiopia. Mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) was established concerning those family 
members. However, he provides financial support and has close personal relationships 
with his mother, two half-brothers who live with her, and his parents-in-law. They have 
no direct connections to the Ethiopian government or terrorists there, but Applicant’s 
close connections to a recognized insurgent opposition group create continuing and 
significant potential for conflict of interest and risk of coercion, exploitation, 
manipulation, or pressure. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation with 
respect to those relationships under AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), or (c). 
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
 The Foreign Preference guideline in effect at the time the SOR was issued 
included potentially disqualifying conditions relating to the exercise of rights or privileges 
of foreign citizenship, and possession or use of a foreign passport. The new Guideline C 
criteria, which came into effect on June 8, 2017, and control this national security 
eligibility determination, explicitly state that the exercise of any right or privilege of 
foreign citizenship (including holding a foreign passport or identity card) is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing that it is in conflict with U.S. national interests 
or the individual attempts to conceal such facts. Applicant renounced his Ethiopian 
citizenship and never renewed the expired Ethiopian passport with which he originally 
entered the United States. No Guideline C foreign preference security concerns are 
raised or supported by substantial evidence in this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
 
7 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do 
not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that are 
normal and commendable results of his family situation. Applicant is a mature person, 
who gained U.S. residence as a refugee, and has been a naturalized citizen since 2010. 
His spouse and two minor children are U.S. citizens. All of his financial assets and 
professional connections are in the United States, and he has no plans to visit Ethiopia 
in the future although he made two extended visits there since becoming a U.S. citizen. 
There is no evidence or allegation that he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. However, his ongoing close relationships with his 
mother, two half-brothers, and parents-in-law who are resident citizens of Ethiopia, 
create significant and ongoing potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant did not meet his 
burden to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns raised by the facts of this 
case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
