 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 16-03187 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
          For Applicant: Rob Bleecher, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On January 11, 2017, 
Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting all allegations raised and requesting a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on March 16, 2017. The matter was initially 
scheduled on March 30, 2017, for an April 4, 2017, hearing. By mutual request of 
counsel, that hearing was cancelled and, on May 10, 2017, the matter was rescheduled 
for June 15, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered four documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-4. Applicant gave testimony and 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG has been again 
amended. The present AG, applied here, is in effect for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
offered eight documents, accepted without objection as Exs. A-H. The record was left 
open through July 5, 2017, to provide the parties with sufficient time to submit additional 
materials. In the interim, a transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on June 23, 
2017. On July 5, 2017, Applicant submitted four additional documents. After review by 
the Government, they were admitted without objection as Exs. I-L, and the record was 
closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old applications engineer who has worked for the same 
entity for about three-and-a-half years. Before this position, he performed the same 
function at another company for three years. He has earned a high school diploma and 
a diploma from a technical institute. Applicant is married and has two adult children.  
 
 Unable to find work in his field at the time, Applicant was self-employed from 
October 2009 to October 2011 as a “matter of necessity.” (Tr. 14) As a result, his 
income was considerably diminished during this timeframe, a period he characterized 
as “unemployment” in his security clearance application.2 (Tr. 32) Much of his debt was 
acquired during this time period. He has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 31) 
 
At present, Applicant earns about $78,000 a year, taking home about $3,600 
every month. His wife returned to the workforce after a lengthy period of unemployment 
about six weeks before the hearing, now adding a net amount of about $2,400 a month 
to the family coffers. This additional sum will move Applicant beyond his present status, 
which is a little above living paycheck to paycheck. A couple of years ago, he returned a 
vehicle voluntarily, noted below at SOR allegation 1.a, when he realized they could no 
longer afford to make payments. Applicant and his wife live in a recreational vehicle, 
partly to economize. He hopes to complete making payments toward ownership of the 
home within the next two years. Applicant owns a weekend vacation house worth 
$7,000, which was purchased several years ago to provide Applicant’s aged parents 
with their own home apart from Applicant. At the time of the hearing, he was about to 
spend a few thousand dollars he and his wife had saved and set aside over the years 
for their daughter’s wedding.  
 
 At issue are 12 delinquent debts, amounting to about $27,000. They range in 
balance from $30 to $15,082. Applicant has a goal of satisfying all of his debts by 
around the end of 2018, aided with an increase in the family coffers from his wife’s 
return to the workforce. (Tr. 27) Those debts, as reflected in the SOR allegations, are:  
 
1.a – Charged-off account ($15,082) – This account is related to a 
recreational vehicle Applicant no longer owns. He voluntarily had it 
repossessed. (Tr. 37-38) Applicant has made no payments toward this 
                                                          
2 During that two-year period, Applicant earned “very little [income], but a little bit, yes.” (Tr. 33) He 
guessed he earned less than $20,000 per year.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
debt because of his wife’s precarious employment in recent times. (Tr. 38) 
He also is unsure whether this is the proper balance owed. He has asked 
the creditor to verify what the vehicle sold for at auction in order to confirm 
the amount allegedly outstanding. 
 
1.b – Charged-off account ($10,161) – This student loan account has 
been satisfied. (Tr. 22-23, 39; Ex. H) 
 
1.c – Charged-off account ($632) – Applicant showed a money order for 
this amount was purchased and he introduced a certified mail receipt for 
correspondence mailed to this creditor on the same day. This is sufficient 
to show this debt has been satisfied. (Ex. K) 
 
1.d-1.i and 1.k-1.l – Medical debts ($1,367) - Applicant has not yet taken 
action on these accounts, which were accumulated over the years. He is 
unsure of the conditions for which medical care was sought. (Tr. 39) 
Although most are under $250, Applicant tarried in addressing them 
because he had been contemplating bankruptcy. (Tr. 40) Having 
abandoned that idea in favor of honoring all of his debts, he now takes 
responsibility for them. 
 
1.j – Charged-off account ($289) – Applicant provided evidence that this 
account balance was paid.3 (Ex. K) 
 
Going forward, Applicant plans to start addressing his medical debts one at a time, then 
make payment arrangements on his larger debts. With his wife’s income, as noted, he 
can realistically satisfy the remaining debts by around the end of 2018 or early 2019. 
 
 For tax years (TY) 2012, 2013, and 2014, Applicant failed to timely file federal 
and state income tax returns.4 Shortly before the hearing, Applicant filed federal and 
state tax returns for those years. (Tr. 17-18; Exs. D-F) He attributes his delay to anxiety 
and depression at the time, which led to his filing for extensions, then having them 
“snowballed year after year after year.” He also cites to his more recent need to replace 
some of his wife’s missing W2 forms from a former employer. (Tr. 17-19) He is now on 
medication for his anxiety and depression. He was able to prepare his own federal tax 
returns with commercial software. (Tr. 19) Applicant provided documentary evidence 
reflecting that the federal and state tax returns at issue in SOR allegations 1.m and 1.n 
                                                          
3 In submitting his evidence, Applicant noted that the receipt also satisfied a delinquent account with a 
balance of $172.81. However, inasmuch as there is no other debt shown on the SOR with this collections 
entity or with this balance, it is unclear whether the $172.81 payment is related to this case or simply an 
example of another debt being honored. 
 
4 According to the SOR, tax returns were owed to two states. SOR allegation 1.n concerns returns due to 
State I (Applicant’s residence) for TY 2012 and TY 2013, whereas SOR allegation 1.o references tax 
returns owed to State II (his workplace) for TY 2013 and TY 2014. Applicant testified that he did not live in 
State II during that time, and that all State I taxes were paid. (Tr. 30; see Exs. D, F, I-J) Taxes to a third 
state, State III, for TY 2014 have been addressed. (Tr. 42; Exs. F, I-J) 
 
 
 
 
4 
have been filed. (Exs. D-F, I, J) Applicant disputes any tax obligation for the state (State 
II) noted in SOR allegation 1.o, and his attorney is looking into the matter. 
 
For TYs 2012-2016, Applicant hopes to receive a refund of about $15,943, which 
he would use to satisfy any yet outstanding debt. He also believes an error in his 
software-based tax returns may lead to a refund of about $5,000 for each TY between 
2012 and 2016, but he has not yet filed appropriate amendments. (Tr. 23-24) Such 
sums, if realized, would also be used to satisfy any remaining debt. 
 
Now with appropriate medication, Applicant is capable of timely filing his federal 
taxes. His most recent federal and states taxes were timely filed through his tax 
software. The only large purchase Applicant has made in the past five years was a used 
vehicle for his wife to get to work. Applicant has no other anticipated expenditures other 
than his savings for his daughter’s impending wedding and his regular monthly 
obligations. To supplement his income, he has been working at a part-time position at 
about $90 an hour. (Tr. 46) He has thus far worked 20-30 hours on that job.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
 
 
 
 
5 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant had 
acquired significant delinquent debt and that he had not timely filed federal and state 
income tax returns for multiple years. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.   
 
Under these facts, four conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
 
 
 
 
6 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
           Applicant’s financial issues arose from a combination of factors. These factors 
include two years of significant underemployment, while he struggled to generate an 
income as an independent entrepreneur when he could not find a position as an 
employee. Other matters, such as tax return filings, were deferred due to depression 
and anxiety he was feeling around the same timeframe. In addition, his wife 
experienced her own period of unemployment, a situation adding to their financial 
distress. While Applicant cannot point to a specific illness or condition, medical bills also 
became delinquent. To his credit, he filed requests for extensions to file his tax returns,5 
voluntarily returned an auto he realized he could not afford, moved into a recreational 
vehicle to economized on housing, and took a part-time position at one point in order to 
supplement his income. Under these circumstances, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
At this point, Applicant has satisfied a notable percentage of the delinquent debt 
at issue. By satisfying the debts at SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.j, he has paid 
approximately $11,000 of the total debt at issue. This is an impressive start given recent 
circumstances. Until recently, Applicant was barely covering all bills by himself. With his 
wife’s return to the workforce bringing in an additional net amount of about $2,400 a 
month, he will have sufficient income to satisfy the remaining amount of approximately 
$16,000 on schedule.  
 
Applicant’s plan is to first satisfy his manageable medical debts, then work on 
payment schedules for the few remaining balances as he and his wife can jointly use 
their respective incomes to that end. Moreover, Applicant has filed his federal tax 
returns and states tax returns for his state of residence and a third state. In the interim, 
Applicant’s counsel will look into the claim made by State II that a tax return is 
outstanding. While there is more to be done, Applicant has made solid strides toward 
addressing all of the outstanding issues, and he has the resources to continue his 
approach as described. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
                                                          
5 Failure to file tax returns by itself can be a reason to deny a clearance, as it suggests that an applicant 
has a problem with complying with well-established rules and regulations. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-
01726  at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2018) Here, Applicant was aware of his obligations and filed extensions. 
Further action was deferred only because of his temporary depression and anxiety, not oversight or 
disregard of IRS rules. 
 
 
 
 
7 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old applications engineer who has worked for the same 
entity for about three-and-a-half years, after performing a similar function for three years 
with another employer. This employment came after a two-year period of self-
employment, brought on by necessity when no other jobs were available. During that 
period, he made under $20,000 a year. Applicant is educated, having earned a high 
school diploma and a technical school diploma. He and his wife raised two children.  
 
Applicant acquired considerable debt while underemployed for two years 
between late 2009 and late 2011. Compounded with issues related to anxiety and 
depression, various calls for medical attention within his household, and his wife’s 
lengthy period of unemployment, delinquent debt was amassed and final tax returns 
went unfiled. Applicant has since been continually employed and able to stave off the 
acquisition of additional debt. He has taken some responsible measures to contain his 
finances, such as voluntarily returning a car he could not afford, taking on a part-time 
job, requesting extensions for tax return filing, downsizing into a recreational vehicle, 
and the like. Through such measures, he has addressed some of his debt and made 
substantial headway in addressing his tax returns. Now, with his wife bringing about 
$2,400 extra into the household, he has the ability to make more progress on his debts. 
 
Aside from demonstrating progress on his debts and taxes, Applicant has set 
forth a reasonable plan toward satisfying his remaining debts within a year. The addition 
of his wife’s income and better organization should make his goal possible. At any rate, 
his present progress reflects that he is earnestly, and effectively, addressing his 
financial issues. In light of the above, I find Applicant has mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
