 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-03375  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns, resulting 
from unpaid taxes and delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD 
after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective 
for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on January 31, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
1) On February 25, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on March 8, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit a 
response to the FORM or object to the Government’s Items. Hence, Items 1 through 8 
are admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and divorced. He served in the Marine Corps from 1974 
to 2003. He retired as an officer. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2000. He has worked 
for a defense contractor since 2013. Prior to this position, he was self-employed. (Item 3) 
 
 On November 24, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). In it, he disclosed that he failed to timely pay state and Federal taxes for 2011 and 
2012, but has since resolved those taxes. He also indicated that he had unpaid state and 
Federal taxes for 2013 and 2014, totaling about $20,000. He noted that he was making 
monthly payments of $200 on the tax debts. He also disclosed credit card debts and a 
judgment. (Item 3) During a June 2016 interview, Applicant discussed the unpaid state 
and Federal taxes and delinquent debts. He said he is current on his payments to the 
taxing bodies. (Item 5) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 2015 and September 2016, 
the SOR alleged six delinquent debts and four unpaid tax liabilities, which became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2016, and totaled over $40,000. (Item 4, Item 6) In his 
January 2017 Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations, except a judgment listed in SOR 
¶ 1.e, which he denied because it was paid. (Answer) According to Item 8, that judgment 
was satisfied in October 2016. He did not submit any evidence addressing the resolution 
of the unpaid taxes for 2013 and 2014, or other alleged debts. 
  
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. 
He did not provide a budget or other information related to his financial obligations from 
which to determine his current financial reliability and adherence to his legal responsibility 
to timely pay Federal and state income taxes. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
 
 
3 
 
 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet his financial and legal 
obligations, which began in 2011 and continues to date. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. They are as follows: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for the paid judgment alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. However, Applicant did not produce evidence to establish any of the above 
mitigating conditions regarding the remaining debts, including adherence to a payment 
plan he stated he had with both Federal and state taxing bodies. They are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including those discussed in the 
analysis of the financial considerations guidelines. Applicant is a mature and educated 
individual, who is aware of the Government’s security concerns. He was informed that his 
Answer to the SOR was insufficient to mitigate the allegations because it did not contain 
proof that he was paying or had resolved 9 of the 10 allegations. Despite that notice, he 
did not submit additional evidence. Overall, the absence of evidence creates sufficient 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:        For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.j:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
