 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02958 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but did not mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On November 22, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated on 
December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E and F.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
 
that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether her 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.   
 
By an undated response, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 25, 
2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 26, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals Office (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On 
June 26, 2017, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 16, 
2017. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, did not call witnesses, and did not offer any 
evidence. On August 24, 2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 
8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under 
the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.k, as it was a duplicate of 
SOR ¶ 1.f. Without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. 
(Tr. 7-8) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations except SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, 1.l, and 1.o, with explanations. Applicant’s answers are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old transportation assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2016. She seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her 
current employment. (GE 1; Tr. 17-18, 26-27)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1991. (Tr. 18-19) She served in 
the U.S. Army from October 1991 to April 1992, and received an “uncharacterized” 
discharge after she sustained a stress fracture. (GE 1; Tr. 21) She attended college 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
from 2012 to 2015, and earned approximately 56 credit hours. (GE 1; Tr.19) She has 
two adult children. (Tr. 19-20) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR now alleges 18 separate debts totaling $40,218. These debts are 
established through Applicant’s admissions, in part, and the Government’s exhibits. 
(SOR answer; GE 1 – 4)  
 
Applicant traces her financial problems to 2014 because she was unable to 
work for four months for medical reasons.  (Tr. 22) She returned to work part-time 
after four months, but by then she was in serious financial trouble. (Tr. 23) In October 
2015, she moved to a different state for a better paying job, however, her salary 
dropped significantly shortly after relocating. (Tr. 24-25) 
 
Applicant earns approximately $3,400 a month. After she pays all of her 
expenses, she estimated she has $400 remaining for food. Applicant described her 
situation as living paycheck to paycheck. She does not have a savings account, little 
or nothing in her checking account, and does not have a retirement plan. (Tr. 32-36) 
Applicant testified that she has been unable to make any progress in addressing her 
debts. She anticipated losing her job in September 2017 when her contract expired. 
(Tr. 25-26) Applicant added that she did not see the point in pursuing a clearance with 
her job ending. (Tr. 27) She does not have the funds to pay her creditors. (Tr. 27-28) 
 
In conclusion, there is no evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved her SOR allegations. She did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. Applicant described a short period 
of unemployment in 2014 attributable to medical issues, but did not describe efforts to 
regain financial responsibility since then.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this concern, the SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose her delinquent debts on her October 2015 SF-86. She acknowledges that she 
had debt, but added that she was under the impression she could later update her SF-
86 after she reviewed her credit report. She claimed to have a co-worker who was 
able to correct his SF-86 after he submitted it. Applicant does not remember certifying 
her answers to be true and correct because she “probably didn’t even read where it 
said certification when I signed it.” (Tr. 28-30) Applicant credibly stated that, “I wasn’t 
trying to hide anything.” (Tr. 30)  
 
 Applicant also stated after she moved, the post office did not forward her mail, 
which would account for her not getting her bills. She filled out a change of address 
form. (Tr. 31) During her December 28, 2015 Office of Personnel Management 
Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), she discussed her finances in great detail with 
the investigator. She was open and forthright. The investigator discussed a number of 
 
4 
 
 
other omissions or mistakes Applicant made when completing her SF-86 that dealt 
with her residences, education, employment, military record, references, and 
family/associates. (GE 2) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
 
5 
 
 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s [trustworthiness] 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts 
to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The standard applicable in [public trust positions] is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor 
of the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has been gainfully employed for 
the majority of her adult life. She provided no evidence suggesting her long-standing 
financial problems are being addressed leaving doubts about her suitability for access 
 
7 
 
 
to sensitive information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of 
these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved against Applicant. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying her October 2015 SF-86, stating that 
she was not trying to hide anything and was under the impression she could update 
her SF-86 at a later time. She was open and forthcoming during her OPM PSI about 
her finances and readily acknowledged her omission. I also note that she made 
numerous other mistakes when completing her SF-86.  
 
Based on the available information, it appears Applicant was confused or 
careless when completing her October 2015 SF-86. Her lack of attention to detail 
cannot be imputed as a willful and deliberate attempt to undermine the investigative 
process. Although the information she provided about her past financial situation 
proved to be incorrect, as was other information she provided, I attribute these lapses 
to carelessness and am satisfied that she did not deliberately fail to disclose her 
delinquent debts with intent to deceive.2 
                                                          
2 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines F and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old transportation assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2016. She has successfully raised two adult children. There 
is nothing in the record to suggest that she is anything other than a valued employee 
and responsible member of her community. However, given her current financial 
situation, the Guidelines leave little or no latitude to grant Applicant a clearance given 
her current financial situation. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Withdrawn 
 
Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
