 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01098 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the handling protected information security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and K (handling protected information). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
May 26, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 24, 2017, and 
reassigned to me on December 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 30, 2018, scheduling the hearing for 
February 22, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 1, 2018.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing the personal conduct 
allegation in ¶ 2.b. 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor where she has 
worked since 1988. She seeks to retain her security clearance, which she has held 
since 2002. She attended college for a period without earning a degree. She is single 
with four children.1 
  
 Applicant had three security-significant incidents between 2010 and 2014. In 
2010, she was required to ship a crate of equipment that was designated confidential. 
She had done this many times without incident. On this occasion, the crate was 
delivered to her company’s shipping department without the correct personnel at the 
shipping department being aware that it was arriving. The crate sat at the shipping 
department overnight without being properly secured. Applicant thought at the time that 
she handled the situation properly. The company concluded that Applicant failed to 
“effectively communicate with Security to ensure their coordination with inspection, 
transportation and determination of appropriate storage options prior to shipping.” There 
was no compromise of classified information.2 
 
 In March 2013, Applicant returned from lunch and saw two cleared personnel 
waiting for her outside a controlled area that prohibited cell phones and other non-
classified media. She momentarily forgot that she still had her cell phone on her and 
walked into the controlled area with the two cleared personnel. They noticed the cell 
phone and brought it to her attention. She immediately removed the cell phone from the 
controlled area. There was no compromise of classified information.  Applicant received 
an oral warning and a security re-briefing.3 
 
 In June 2014, Applicant’s children placed her tablet computer (tablet) in a bag of 
clothes without her knowledge. She bought the bag of clothes into the controlled area 
without realizing that the tablet was in the bag. The tablet did not have cellular service, 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-14, 28; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-18, 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-22, 31-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
3 
 
but it was connected by Wi-Fi to her cell phone that was outside the controlled area. 
When she discovered the tablet, she did not immediately remove it from the controlled 
area. Instead, she used it over the course of several hours to search the Internet. Her 
use of the tablet was discovered by her company. There was no evidence that classified 
information was compromised. Applicant was suspended without pay for five days; she 
was required to attend a security update briefing; and she was removed from part of her 
security duties.4 
 
 Applicant is extremely remorseful for her conduct. There have been no additional 
security violations. She submitted documents and letters attesting to her excellent job 
performance. She is praised for her diligence in following security procedures, 
trustworthiness, loyalty, dedication, work ethic, reliability, and integrity. The authors of 
the letters are convinced she has learned from her experiences and there will be no 
further incidents.5 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22-26, 33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 25-29, 33; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, D-F, H. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt 
about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security 
concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant committed three security-significant incidents between 2010 and 2014. 
The evidence raises the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate handling protected information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant is clearly remorseful for her conduct. There have been no additional 
security violations. Her supervisors and co-workers attest to her diligence in following 
security procedures. They are convinced she has learned from her experiences and 
there will be no further incidents. I am satisfied that Applicant possesses a positive 
attitude toward the discharge of her security responsibilities, and that additional security 
violations are unlikely to recur. Both mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline K in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s long employment with the same company and her 
favorable character evidence. Security violations and infractions are some of the 
strongest possible reasons for denying or revoking access to classified information, as 
they raise very serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
 
6 
 
information. Once it is established that an applicant has committed a security violation 
or infraction, he or she has a very heavy burden of demonstrating that being entrusted 
with classified information is warranted. Because security violations and infractions 
strike at the very heart of the industrial security program, an administrative judge must 
give any claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny. In many security clearance 
cases, applicants are denied a clearance for having an indicator of a risk that they might 
commit a security violation or infraction (e.g., alcohol abuse, delinquent debts, or drug 
use). Security violation and infraction cases reveal more than simply an indicator of 
risk.6 The frequency and duration of the security violations and infractions are also 
aggravating factors.7  
 
Nonetheless, I am convinced of Applicant’s sincerity. I further believe the 
experience of going through the adjudicative process had an additional value, in that 
Applicant is cognizant that she must be more diligent in her responsibilities for 
safeguarding classified information. She has met her heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her security clearance.  
 
The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
handling protected information security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 03-26888 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2006). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 5 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998). 
