 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01677 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
 
        Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 26, 2014.1 On August 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006 AGs and 
                                                          
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 
 
 
became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied the newly revised AGs to this decision.2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2016, denying all of the 
allegations in the SOR. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing scheduling 
the hearing for February 13, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – R. I held the record open until 
February 23, 2018, for supplemental documentation. (Tr. 81) Post-hearing, AE S 
through AE MM were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in 1997 (AE L) and 
he has been employed as the lead systems administrator for a federal contractor at a 
major health center since September 2013. He never married and reports no military 
service. (Tr. 41) He was unemployed from November 2007 to October 2008, and from 
August 2009 to February 2010. Applicant had a security clearance for over 20 years 
without incident. (Tr. 11) He disclosed in section 26 of his SCA that he had tax issues 
with the IRS. From 2004 – 2007, he day traded in stocks. He did not understand how to 
properly file his income tax returns and particularly, Schedule D. Applicant stated that as 
a result, his cost basis and losses were never reported to the IRS, or to the State A 
comptroller’s office.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his SCA that he retained legal assistance in 2011 and 
finally submitted amended income tax returns (for all four years in question) to the IRS 
and state A, in October 2014. (AE MM) The SOR alleges one tax lien entered against 
Applicant in 2007, for $31,639 (SOR ¶1.e), and another in 2014, for $17,528 (SOR ¶ 
1.a). It also alleges four tax liens entered against Applicant by state A in 2007, 2008 
(two liens) and 2012 at SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.d, and 1.f. Applicant testified that all of his 
delinquent state taxes have been completely paid and the tax liens satisfied. (Tr. 41-42, 
50) He provided a document from state A comptroller dated September 12, 2016, 
showing that the state tax liens have been satisfied. (AE A)  
           .    
  Applicant testified that when he was day trading from 2004 – 2007, he was a 
naïve 25 year old, and he failed to perform due diligence concerning his investments. 
(Tr. 53-54) He credibly stated that he did not understand or account for cost-basis of 
capital gains when he filed his income tax returns. (Tr. 54) Consequently, he incurred 
                                                          
2 Although I have applied the new AGs that became effective on June 8, 2017, to this decision, I have 
also considered the case under the previous AGs and my decision would be no different under either 
version.  
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 26, 2014 
SCA. (GE 1)  
 
 
3 
 
 
approximately $75,000 in tax liens from state A and the IRS. (Tr. 20) When he realized 
this, he was overwhelmed and he initially consulted with some attorneys who were not 
helpful. (Tr. 61) Then, Applicant became unemployed from 2008 – 2010 because he 
suffered injuries playing hockey and an illness that required surgery. (Tr. 58) He is now 
employed full time since September 2013 and earns $130,000 per year. (GE 1, Tr. 54)  
Applicant no longer day trades, or invests in the stock market. (Tr. 54-55)  
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR when he filed his September 2016 
response because he had already completely satisfied the state tax liens at SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. (Tr. 41, 50) He submitted documentation confirming this. (AE A) He 
also testified and submitted documentation to prove that he filed amended federal and 
state tax returns in 2014 for tax years (TY) 2004 – 2007. (Tr. 52, AE CC, DD, EE, FF) 
He finally found helpful tax advisors, at a reasonable rate, to help him with his tax 
issues. (Tr. 61, AE MM) Applicant denied the two federal tax liens alleged in the SOR 
because the stated amounts were wrong, due to him amending his returns. (Tr. 52)  
 
Post hearing, Applicant submitted documentation reflecting the federal tax 
deficiencies, or amounts owed as of 2011, for TY 2004-2007 (AE T, U, V, X, and Y), 
compared to the amounts now owing in 2018. (AE Y, Z, AA, and BB) Applicant has 
substantially reduced his tax debts. Currently, he has a zero balance owing for TY 2004; 
$1,463 owing for TY 2005; zero balance for TY 2006; and $14,940 owing for TY 2007. 
He reached out to the IRS in June 2015 and entered into a payment plan. (AE B, KK). 
He has been making steady payments by automatic deductions from his bank account, 
to resolve the debts. (Tr. 44-45, AE C, O, J) Applicant has been making continuous 
payments of $1,338 per month to the IRS for over two years. (Tr. 73) His last payment 
was on February 7, 2018. (AE O) Applicant testified credibly that he made some earlier 
payments to the IRS even before his payment plan. (Tr. 80) He delayed confronting the 
tax problems initially because he was not sure if it was an IRS mistake, and he did try to 
consult with attorneys. He had difficulty obtaining his stock transaction records from the 
trading houses, and those records arrived in indecipherable spreadsheet format. (Tr. 
79-80)     
  
 Applicant presented testimony from three character witnesses including a 
biomedical engineer, an audiologist, and the information technology manager at NICOE.  
They observed him on a daily basis and all attested to his integrity, competence and 
reliability. They testified that he is proficient, trustworthy, and reliable, and he is critical 
to the operations at the health center data center. (Tr. 24-38) They have no reservations 
about Applicant having access to classified information. He also submitted four 
character reference letters from other staff members at the health center and a hockey 
teammate. (AE G) They extol Applicant’s good character, collegiality, and 
trustworthiness. Applicant’s credit reports reflect no new delinquencies, and his credit 
score is up to 741. (Tr. 19) He is committed to resolving his tax issues, and has 
established a payment plan, and continuous payments, to satisfy his two remaining 
federal tax liens.  
 
   
 
4 
 
 
                                             Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶18:  
 
5 
 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
     required.  
 
 Applicant disclosed his tax issues in his SCA and the Government’s case in 
chief, including credit bureau reports, confirm the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
6 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
  (c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the  
 problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit  
counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant has now resolved, or entered into a payment plan to resolve virtually all 
of the alleged delinquent debts. He had two years of unemployment from 2008 – 2010, 
and serious health issues. These factors were beyond his control. Although, it appears 
that he delayed taking action to address his tax liens until after he filed his SCA, he 
testified credibly that he was not simply ignoring them. Applicant disclosed his 
delinquent debts in his SCA, and he has contacted the state comptroller and the IRS to 
make payment arrangements to satisfy his tax liens. He followed through with a 
demonstrated track record of consistent payments of $1,338 per month, pursuant to an 
installment plan with the IRS. He provided documentation from the state comptroller 
showing satisfaction of the state tax liens. Virtually all of his delinquent debts are now 
being addressed by payment plans, or otherwise resolved. Applicant has received 
financial counseling and assistance from tax advisors, and he has a viable plan going 
forward. Applicant was slow to start but he has now acted responsibly despite adverse 
circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d) and 20(g) apply. I am satisfied that his 
tax liens are being resolved. They resulted from mistakes he made as a young man, 
which will not likely recur.   
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances are no longer a security concern. There are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has met his burden 
of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.f:             For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
 
