 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03884 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On February 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005 and effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
 
2 
 
 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.   
 
On March 17, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 10, 2017, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On May 26, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals Office (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On June 27, 
2017, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 17, 2017. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, did not call witnesses, and did not offer any 
evidence. I held the record open until October 17, 2017, to allow Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. At Applicant’s request, I granted him an 
extension until November 17, 2017. Despite being granted this additional time, 
Applicant did not submit any evidence. On August 25, 2017, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all 
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 
8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under 
the new AGs, as required.1 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR, by adding ¶ 1.i – “You failed to 
file your 2014, 2015, and 2016 Federal income returns, as required.” Without objection 
from the Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 50) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and denied the 
remaining allegations, with explanations. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old database manager and advanced analysis instructor 
employed by a defense contractor since February 2015. He seeks to retain his  
security clearance, which is a requirement to keep his job.  (GE 1; Tr. 11-14)  
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1991. (GE 1; Tr. 14-15) He served in 
the U.S. Navy from March 1992 to April 2012, and retired honorably as an aviation 
antisubmarine warfare specialist first class (pay grade E-6). (Tr. 21-23) While he was 
in the Navy, Applicant estimated that he earned 42 online college credits. (Tr. 15) 
 
Applicant married in June 1994 and separated in October 2006. His wife is 
employed as a customer service representative for a financial company. Applicant has 
two minor children from his marriage, has an adult son from a previous relationship, 
and has a minor child with his cohabitant. His cohabitant is employed as an operations 
officer at a public charter school. He is paying his wife $900 in monthly child support 
for their two children. Referring to the status of his marriage and getting a divorce, 
Applicant stated that, “[I] just really haven’t gotten around to it.”(Tr. 15-21) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists seven debts totaling approximately $77,092, an allegation 
of defaulting on his mortgage, and an allegation of failing to file his Federal income tax 
returns. In summary, those allegations are as follows: 1.a – a charged-off second 
mortgage for $70,090; 1.b – a January 2015 mortgage default; 1.c – a credit card 
collection account for $2,822; 1.d – a credit card collection account for $1,011; 1.e – a 
credit card collection account for $491; 1.f – a credit card collection account for 
$2,113; 1.g – a collection account for $75; 1.h – a credit card collection account for 
$490; and failure to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2014, 2015, and 
2016. These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions, in part, and 
the Government exhibits. (SOR answer; GE 1-3) 
 
When asked at his hearing how he got into financial difficulty, Applicant 
responded, “Honestly, sir, I wasn’t aware of half of the stuff.” (Tr. 23) He 
acknowledged being interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator as part of his background investigation. Applicant stated that he told the 
OPM investigator that there was “no way these can be my charges because I hadn’t 
had a credit card and the only loan I had taken out at that time was a loan for . . . an 
engraving machine to make, to put pictures on dog tags.” (Tr. 24) Applicant surmised 
that his estranged wife incurred the SOR debts “[a]nytime between 2012 and 2014, 
’15.” (Tr. 25) Applicant has not done anything to address these accounts. (Tr. 25) 
 
Department Counsel reviewed the status of each of Applicant’s SOR debts with 
him. Applicant did state that he “figured” once he began paying court-ordered child 
support in August 2012 that his estranged wife would pay the mortgage. Applicant did 
not have a discussion with his wife regarding whether or not she was in fact paying the 
mortgage. He only learned about his mortgage foreclosure when his wife and children 
moved out of the family home. Applicant claimed that he did not receive any legal 
notices concerning the foreclosure. (Tr. 25-30) As Department Counsel reviewed each 
of the SOR debts with Applicant, he claimed to be unaware of the debt or to have no 
knowledge of debt status. (Tr. 31-34) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant estimated that he has a net monthly remainder of “around $700.” He 
stated that most of that remainder goes towards his children. Applicant stated that he 
had about $213 in his savings account and “around $4,000 and some change” in his 
checking account. He has a 401(k) account with a current balance of “right around 
$11,000,” and a timeshare that he purchased in 2005 for $20,000 that he owns 
outright. He drives a 2011 Hyundai Sonata with a loan balance of “about $4,000.” (Tr. 
34-38)  
 
As of his hearing date, Applicant had not filed his 2014, 2015, and 2016 
Federal income tax returns because he did not owe any money and there was “just no 
rush.” He was informed that he was required to file even if he was owed a refund. 
Applicant stated that he was going to file all three Federal tax returns at the same 
time. (Tr. 39-41) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
 
5 
 
 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012) (citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine 
the totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The 
Judge must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-
 
6 
 
 
control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national 
secrets as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The 
Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the 
Guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax as required.” The record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists six potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
 
7 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Concerning the failure to file timely Federal and state income tax returns, the 
DOHA Appeal Board has commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2002). As we have noted in the past, a clearance 
adjudication is not directed at collecting debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By the same token, neither is it 
directed toward inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a 
proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. 
Id. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does 
not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & 
Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 
(D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis in original). See 
ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002)); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 
18, 2015). The Appeal Board clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has 
purportedly corrected [the applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] 
is now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude careful 
consideration of [a]pplicant’s security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding 
prior behavior evidencing irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal 
income tax returns. See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 
2016) (characterizing “no harm, no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct 
and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval 
of access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after 
receipt of the SOR).   
 
 
8 
 
 
In ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 2 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016), the Appeal Board 
reversed the grant of a security clearance, and noted the following primary relevant 
disqualifying facts:  
 
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return in December 2013 
and received a $2,074 tax refund. He filed his 2012 Federal tax return in 
September 2014 and his 2013 Federal tax return in October 2015. He 
received Federal tax refunds of $3,664 for 2012 and $1,013 for 2013. 
 
Notwithstanding the lack of any tax debt owed, the Appeal Board provided the 
following principal rationale for reversing the grant of a security clearance: 
 
Failure to comply with Federal and/or state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government 
rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information.  .  .  .  By failing to file his 
2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, 
Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of persons granted access to classified information.  
 
ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 4 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (citations omitted). Applicant 
provided proof that he “made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or 
pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements,” and AG ¶ 20(g) 
applies. However, because of Applicant’s lengthy history of noncompliance with 
requirements to timely file tax returns, the mitigation in AG ¶ 20(g) is insufficient to 
alleviate financial considerations security concerns. ISCR Case No. 16-00396 at 3 
(App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017) states: 
 
It is well established, however, that a security clearance adjudication 
does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of the mitigating 
conditions apply to the particular facts of a case. Rather, an adjudication 
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence 
as a whole. Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not 
alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance 
determination. As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence 
as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the 
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa. 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has been gainfully 
employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature, 
responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his long-
standing financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability 
for access to classified information. Applicant did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances with regard to his taxes by failing to file timely his 2014, 2015, and 
2016 Federal tax returns. Appellant was provided with ample opportunity to submit 
 
9 
 
 
evidence of efforts to resolve his debts, but failed to submit any evidence of such 
efforts.  
 
Given the dim view the DOHA Appeal Board takes of failing to file Federal tax 
returns, there is little or no latitude to rule in Applicant’s favor with regard to the tax 
issue. With regard to the remaining debts, Applicant failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. Protection of the national interest is 
the principal focus of these adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline F are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old database manager and advanced analysis instructor 
employed by a defense contractor since 2015. He served in the Navy with 20 years of 
honorable service. Applicant seeks to retain his security clearance, which is a 
requirement to keep his job. There is nothing in the record that suggests he is not a 
good employee or law-abiding member of his community. He is dedicated to his 
children as demonstrated by his willingness to help them financially.     
 
However, the evidence against granting his security clearance is more 
substantial. He failed to exercise a fundamental responsibility as a citizen by failing to 
file timely his Federal and state income tax returns, as discussed above. His financial 
situation is in dire straits and he appears unwilling or unable to address it. When a tax 
issue is involved, an administrative judge is required to consider how long an applicant 
waits to file his or her tax returns, whether the IRS generates the tax returns, and how 
 
10 
 
 
long the applicant waits after a tax debt arises to begin and complete making 
payments.  
 
Further perplexing is Applicant’s failure to resolve or attempt to resolve his 
long-standing SOR debts. In Applicant’s case, the OPM investigator discussed his 
SOR debts with him before his SOR was issued. If that interview failed to heighten his 
awareness of the Government’s concern, the fact that he was issued an SOR in 
January 2017 should certainly have heightened that awareness. Unfortunately, 
Applicant did not heed these promptings and when provided with a significant period 
of post-hearing time to address his financial concerns, he failed to take action.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
