 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-03570 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 7, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 7, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 5.) On December 19, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 29, 2016, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.) On 
March 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 9, was 
provided to Applicant, who received the file on April 6, 2017.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions2 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Amendment of SOR 
  
 In the FORM, Section IV, page 4, Department Counsel proposed to amend the 
SOR by adding subparagraphs 2.e and 2.f. Department Counsel indicates that the 
authority for her proposed amendments is ¶ E3.1.13 of the Directive. That paragraph 
does not deal with amendments to the SOR. Amendments to the SOR are governed by 
¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, which states:  
 
The SOR may be amended at the hearing by the Administrative Judge on 
his or her own motion, or upon motion by Department Counsel or the 
applicant, so as to render it in conformity with the evidence admitted or for 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted nine Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 9 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of two unsworn interviews of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on June 1, 2016, and August 2, 2016. Applicant did not adopt the summary as 
his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of 
Investigation (ROI) summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. See Executive Order 10865 § 5. In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 9 is also 
cumulative. Applicant is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM 
footnote 1, which described the potential admissibility of Item 9. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially 
mitigating information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating 
information will be discussed later in this Decision. 
 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
other good cause. When such amendments are made, the Administrative 
Judge may grant either party’s request for such additional time as the 
Administrative Judge may deem appropriate for further preparation or for 
other good cause. (Emphasis supplied.)  
 
 Even though not specifically covered, I shall consider the proposed amendments 
pursuant to ¶ E3.1.10 of the Directive, which states, “The Administrative Judge may rule 
on questions on procedure, discovery, and evidence and shall conduct all proceedings 
in a fair, timely, and orderly manner.” As a general matter, it is noted that Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. 
 
 Department Counsel proposed to amend the SOR by adding new subparagraphs 
2.e and 2.f. As stated, Applicant chose not to respond to the FORM in general, or to the 
proposed amendments in particular. Concerning the contents of the FORM, ¶ E3.1.7 of 
the Directive states, “Department Counsel shall provide applicant with a copy of all 
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.” Proposed 
substantial amendments to the SOR are not contained within this ambit. In addition, the 
proposed amendments in the FORM did not give the Applicant an opportunity to request 
a hearing, additional time for preparation of exhibits, nor did it inform him that failure to 
respond to the proposed amendments might result in his case being closed, as provided 
for under ¶¶ E3.1.4, E3.1.5, and E3.1.17 of the Directive. Department Counsel could 
have served on Applicant a properly formatted amended SOR, or withdrawn the original 
SOR and issued a new one. The motion to amend the SOR by adding allegations 2.e 
and 2.f is denied as I deem it inappropriate under ¶ E3.1.10 of the Directive. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 41 and married with two children. He has been most recently 
employed by a defense contractor since January 2011. Applicant first received a 
security clearance in approximately 2006 during a prior term of employment with the 
same defense contractor. He seeks to obtain national security eligibility for access to 
classified information in connection with his employment. (Item 3 at Sections 13A, 16, 
17.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.w concern past-due debts of Applicant. These include 
medical debts, credit card debts, and past-due child support. The total amount of money 
Applicant allegedly owes on those debts is approximately $34,397. The existence and 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
amount of the debts is supported by credit reports dated July 22, 2015; and September 
22, 2016. (Items 6 and 7.) Applicant also admitted that his wages had been garnished in 
February 2016 in the approximate amount of $15,652. (SOR subparagraph 1.x.) 
 
 Section 26 of Applicant’s e-QIP (Item 5) discusses his financial record. Applicant 
describes many of the delinquent debts and states that the reason for the financial issue 
was, “Financial hardship.” Applicant elected not to respond to the FORM. He submitted 
no financial information, such as a budget, from which to make a conclusion that he is 
now financially stable.  
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
Applicant admitted all the allegations under this paragraph. 
 
 2.a. Applicant admitted that he used marijuana from approximately February 
1994 to 2011. Applicant allegedly told an interviewer that he stopped using marijuana 
“to focus on his employment.”  (Item 9 at 5.) 
 
 2.b. Applicant filled out a Security Clearance Application on September 22, 2005. 
(Item 8.) Section 27 of the application asks whether Applicant had used illegal drugs, 
including marijuana, within the seven years preceding the date he filled out the 
application. Applicant responded, “No,” to this question. Applicant admitted that this was 
a false response.  
 
 2.c. Applicant admitted that he used marijuana after being granted a security 
clearance in January 2006. 
 
 2.d. Applicant admitted that he was arrested in February 2012 and charged with 
Public Swearing/Intoxication and Possession of Marijuana. He allegedly stated to an 
investigator that the marijuana in question was actually his wife’s. (Item 9 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on documentary evidence, had 22 delinquent accounts that he 
could not or chose not to resolve. He also had his wages garnished. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence does not establish that any of the above mitigating conditions apply 
to Applicant. He failed to submit any evidence that would tend to support any of them. 
There is no basis for me to find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns of his 
financial situation. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are applicable under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(c) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant admitted falsifying a Government questionnaire, using marijuana until 
at least 2011, using marijuana after being granted a security clearance, and being 
arrested for possession of marijuana in 2012. Both of the cited disqualifying conditions 
have application in this case. 
 
 The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
was so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant elected not to respond to the FORM, and there is insufficient other 
evidence to show that this mitigating condition applies. None of the other mitigating 
conditions are applicable on their face. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility and a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility was 
recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not 
demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. In addition, Applicant has a history of 
marijuana use and falsification of a Government questionnaire. Overall, the record 
evidence as described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.x:   Against Applicant 
   
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:   Against Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
