 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03390 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 17, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
was submitted on May 19, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 31, 2017. He responded to the FORM with documentation I 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, and admitted in evidence without 
objection. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on December 18, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is 41 years old. He married in 
1996, divorced in 2000, and remarried in 2002. He has three minor children. He has 
been employed by a defense contractor as a lead field supervisor since June 2015. He 
worked for a prior defense contractor from 2010 to 2014. He obtained his high school 
diploma in 1995. He served in the U.S. military from June 1996 to July 2000, when he 
was honorably discharged. He was first granted a security clearance when he served in 
the U.S. military.2  
 
 The SOR alleges an $8,166 state tax lien from July 2015, five delinquent 
consumer accounts totaling $1,893, and a $125 delinquent medical account. In addition 
to his admissions, a county record and a December 2016 credit report verify the lien 
and delinquent debts. Applicant also listed and discussed them in his security clearance 
application and during his subject interview.3 
 
 Applicant attributes his state tax lien to filing his 2011 state income tax return on 
the incorrect form. He attributes his remaining delinquent debts to a layoff in January 
2005 due to a lack of work, after which he was consequently unemployed from February 
to August 2005. He also unintentionally failed to update a creditor, for the purpose of 
automatic payment deductions, with his employer’s information in October 2014. Finally, 
he was in a car accident and took unpaid medical leave from February to April 2016.4 
 
 Applicant incurred the state tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.a because he filed his 2011 state 
income tax return on the incorrect form, as previously discussed. He took his return to a 
tax professional to have them correctly filed. He provided documentation to show that 
the lien was released in June 2017.5  
 
 Applicant stated that he contacted the creditors for SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e and 
1.g to set up payment plans. He also intended to make a payment in full for SOR ¶ 1.f. 
He provided documentation to show that he paid SOR ¶ 1.b in April 2017.6   
                                                          
2 Items 2-3, 6.  
 
3 Items 1, 3-6. 
 
4 Items 2, 3, 6. 
 
5 Item 2; AE A. 
 
6 Item 2; AE A. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
5 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s use of the incorrect form to file his 2011 state income tax return, his 
January 2005 layoff and consequent unemployment from February to August 2005, his 
unintentional failure to update a creditor in October 2014 with his employer’s information 
for the purpose of automatic payment deductions, and his car accident after which he 
took unpaid medical leave from February to April 2016, constitute conditions beyond his 
control that contributed to his delinquent debts. He has shown that he acted responsibly 
under his circumstances. He provide documentation to show that the tax lien in SOR ¶ 
1.a was released in June 2017, and he paid SOR ¶ 1.b in April 2017.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
While Applicant has outstanding debts, I find that he intends to resolve them, as he did 
with SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(d) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
6 
 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service.  
 
The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
