 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-01100  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
foreign influence, personal conduct, and sexual behavior concerns raised by his affair 
with a Chinese national and his continued contact with her after being directed by his 
employer to terminate the relationship. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence, personal 
conduct, and sexual behavior guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On September 8, 
2017, I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission 
of discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.2  At the hearing, convened on September 28, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, without objection. Applicant did not offer any documents.  I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on October 6, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded those implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
decided this case under the 2017 AG. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about China. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. Relevant facts 
are noted below.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 33, has worked for his current employer since October 2014 as 
technician. He served in the U.S. Air Force from 2003 to 2010 and received a honorable 
discharge. Applicant was granted access to classified information in 2003 and was 
upgraded to access to sensitive compartmented access (SCI) in 2007. In 2011, 
Applicant began working for a federal contracting company, servicing a contract held by 
a government agency. Under the terms of his employment, he was required to report all 
contacts with foreign nationals. A review of Applicant’s security clearance eligibility was 
initiated in March 2012 after he self-reported a romantic relationship with a woman who 
was a Chinese national.4 
 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II.  
 
3 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE III. 
  
4 GE 1; Tr. 14-15. 
 
3 
 
In January 2012, Applicant met the woman at a shopping mall and they became 
friends. The woman informed Applicant that she was married and not interested in a 
romantic relationship. He reported the contact to his facility security officer (FSO) nine 
days after their initial meeting. The FSO advised Applicant to report any developments 
in the relationship to the security office. Although the relationship became intimate in 
late January or early February 2012, Applicant did not update his foreign contact report 
until March 2012 because he was unsure if the relationship would be long term. After he 
made the updated report, the security officer asked Applicant for more information about 
the woman and her family. Applicant learned that the woman’s husband was a member 
of the Chinese military and that her father previously worked for the Chinese military. 
Applicant claims that he did not know the details of either man’s job, but admitted that 
the woman told him that a non-disclosure agreement prevented her from disclosing 
details of her husband’s job to third parties.5  
 
The FSO informed Applicant that if he continued the relationship, his employer 
would remove him from the contract, which involved China – a country known to engage 
in acts of espionage against the United States through a variety of methods, including 
the exploitation of personal relationships. At the time, Applicant’s employer had no other 
open positions. Applicant’s employer gave him the weekend to consider his options. 
The following week, Applicant informed his employer that he terminated the relationship. 
Applicant submitted to a counterintelligence (CI) interview and signed a security 
agreement, promising that he would have no further contact with the woman.  In a 
second CI interview days later, the FSO warned Applicant that continued contact with 
the woman would result in the termination of his employment. The FSO also advised 
Applicant to report any attempts by the woman to contact him to the security office for 
guidance.6  
 
In May 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application. He disclosed 
his contact with the Chinese national, indicating that their last contact occurred in April 
2012 and that he expected no contact with her in the future. He reiterated these 
statements in a September 2012 background interview.7  
 
In February 2014, Applicant submitted to a polygraph examination. In the pretest 
interview, Applicant admitted that he and the Chinese national kept in touch by email 
after he signed the April 2012 security agreement. He told the polygrapher that he could 
not remember if they decided to maintain contact before or after he signed the security 
agreement. The couple emailed each other once per month on the anniversary of the 
day they met. Applicant stated that the email contact ended in August 2013, when his 
new girlfriend found out about the emails and demanded Applicant cease contact. 8 
 
                                                          
5 GE 3; Tr. 16, 23-25. 
 
6 GE 3; Tr. 25-27. 
 
7 GE 2; Tr. 28-29.  
 
8 GE 3; Tr. 27.  
 
4 
 
During the posttest, the polygrapher informed Applicant that he had physiological 
responses to questions about his contacts with foreign nationals and again asked 
Applicant about his last contact with the Chinese national. Applicant admitted that the 
two spent time together in October 2012 before she returned to China and continued 
emailing each other until November 2013, when Applicant’s new girlfriend discovered 
the continuing contact and wrote emails to the woman in November and December 
2013. Applicant received another email from the Chinese national in January 2014. 
Applicant drafted a response to apologize for his girlfriend’s emails. He deleted the 
response when he received scheduling notification for the polygraph test. He admitted 
that he still had some feelings for her, but ended contact to appease his new girlfriend.9  
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that when he signed the 2012 security 
agreement, he did so knowing that he intended to maintain contact with the Chinese 
national. He also admits that he lied about the continuing contact on his 2012 security 
clearance application and during his September 2012 background interview. According 
to Applicant:10 
 
I didn’t perceive her a threat to national security. I mean, that’s why it 
also kind of made it that much harder. I’m not really supposed to be a 
judge on that in those matters, but she never asked any prying 
questions about my work or any classified information. I never got 
contacted by anyone from her family or from China about anything. So 
the risk to me, at least, was always minimal.11 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
9 GE 3; Tr. 16-22, 29-30. 
 
10 Tr. 26-28. 
 
11 Tr. 20. 
 
5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
` 
Analysis 
 
 The record establishes the Government’s prima facie case under the foreign 
influence, personal conduct, and sexual behavior guidelines. The record establishes 
that Applicant engaged in an affair with a married, Chinese foreign national whose 
husband was a member of the Chinese military and whose father had ties with the 
same.12 This relationship created a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion.13 This risk was exacerbated by the fact that 
Applicant failed to report or fully disclose, when required, to his employer and the 
agency he supported, the extent of his association with the Chinese national.14 
Applicant also violated a written commitment made to his employer as a condition of his 
employment to end the relationship and cease all contact with the woman.15  
 
Because Applicant no longer has contact with the Chinese national, the foreign 
influence concern is mitigated and resolved in his favor. However, the sexual behavior 
and personal conduct concerns remain. After reviewing the relevant mitigating 
conditions under each guideline, I find that none of the relevant mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant maintained a relationship with a foreign national for one and one-half 
years after he knew that doing so was incompatible with his obligations as a clearance 
holder. He knowingly lied to and actively concealed the ongoing contact from his 
employer, the agency he supported, and his girlfriend. He only admitted the conduct 
when he was forced to do so. Applicant’s actions are neither minor, nor mitigated by the 
passage of time. His actions continue to reflect negatively on his ongoing security 
worthiness. When presented with a conflict of interest between his self-interest and his 
fiduciary duties as a clearance holder, Applicant cannot be relied upon to resolve that 
conflict in the interest of the United States.  
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 7(b) and AG ¶ 13(c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
14 AG ¶ 7(c).  
 
15 AG ¶ 16(f). 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Security clearance decisions are not an exact science, but 
rather are predictive judgments about a person's security suitability in light of that 
person's past conduct and present circumstances.16 Applicant’s conduct raises 
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness that make his continued 
access to classified information an unacceptable security risk.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Sexual Behavior:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
16 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-29 (1988).  
 
