 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )       ISCR Case: 16-02856  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not file his Federal or state tax returns for tax years 2010 through 
2015 in a timely manner, as required. He did not submit sufficient evidence to show that 
the returns have now been filed. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 24, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On October 14, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2017, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
(Item 2.) On March 21, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on March 22, 2017, and received by him on April 4, 2017. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, or object to its contents. 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.1 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is divorced. Applicant has worked for his current 
employer since 1994. (Item 3.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has failed to meet his financial obligations and is therefore potentially 
unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Items 4 and 5 are 
inadmissible. They are summaries of unsworn interviews of Applicant conducted by interviewers from the 
Office of Personnel Management on May 26, 2016; and May 21, 2013. Applicant did not adopt the 
summaries as his own statements, or otherwise certify them to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, 
these Report of Investigation (ROI) summaries are inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the 
absence of an authenticating witness. (See Executive Order 10865 at Section 5.) In light of Applicant’s 
admissions, Items 4 and 5 are also cumulative. Applicant is not legally trained and might not have 
understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnotes 1 and 2, which describe the potential admissibility of 
Items 4 and 5. I therefor reviewed them for any potentially mitigating information that Applicant might have 
thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will be discussed later in this decision. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has failed to timely file his Federal and state tax 
returns for at least the tax years 2010 through 2015, as required. Applicant admitted both 
of the SOR allegations. (Item 1; Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant also provided the following statement on his Answer with regard to each 
allegation, “Steps are being taken to rectify this issue.” No further information was 
provided in his Answer. (Item 2.) 
 
 In Section 23 of Applicant’s e-QIP (Item 3) he admitted that he had not filed Federal 
or state taxes for years 2010 through 2012. For tax year 2010 he stated, “taxes were not 
filed due to lost/misplaced W-2 forms,” and, “I am in the process of [gathering] info and 
contacting the agencies.” For tax year 2011 he stated he had, “misplaced forms,” and, “I 
am in the process of locating the forms and will contact the appropriate agencies.” Finally, 
for 2012, he stated, “I did not file for an extension in time. I am missing info to accurately 
file.” For that year he also stated, “Info that is missing is being located.” Applicant’s 
interview with an OPM investigator on May 21, 2013, basically tracks what he stated in 
Item 3. (Item 5.) 
 
 As stated, Applicant had a subsequent interview with an OPM investigator on May 
26, 2016. The investigator reports on page 1 of Item 4: 
 
Subject [Applicant] has not filed any of his federal or state income taxes 
since 2007. Subject contacted the IRS last year [2015] to request copies of 
his W2 forms from 2007 to the present. Subject received the package of 
forms last year; however, he now “needs to catch up.” Subject plans to 
resolve this matter as soon as possible. He plans to have the IRS file the 
taxes for him; however, he has not contacted them to do so yet. Subject 
stated he will contact them next week. Subject filed an extension for his 
2007 taxes. 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information concerning whether he actually had filed 
his state or Federal income tax returns, as required, for the years in question. In addition, 
he did not provide any information to show whether he was entitled to a refund on his 
taxes, or that he has paid any tax owed. Applicant provided no evidence concerning the 
quality of his job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence 
tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate 
his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing.  
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions 
 
 
4 
 
 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes one condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file Federal and state tax returns, as required, for at least 
tax years 2010 through 2015, as alleged in the SOR. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying condition, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes one condition in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted failure to timely file tax returns: 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant did not supply any documentation to show that he has filed any of his 
past-due tax returns. Nor did he submit any evidence to show that he has entered into a 
payment arrangement with the IRS or any state taxing authority, and is in compliance with 
such arrangements, if he had filed tax returns and owed taxes. Applicant only stated in 
his Answer that, “Steps are being taken to rectify this situation,” without further 
explanation. That statement is not enough. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not mitigate his tax issues. Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide any 
additional evidence to support the contention in his Answer that the “situation is being 
rectified.” He has known of the Government’s concern over his failure to file tax returns 
for several years. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains 
undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
