 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03393 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 29, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On August 12, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (eQIP-86). (Government Exhibit 2.)  On January 30, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
April 26, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, were 
received by Applicant on May 4, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM dated 
July 11, 2017, and it was admitted into evidence without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit 
A.  DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017.  Items 1 through 5 are admitted 
into evidence, and going forward are referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old.  He has no prior military service.  He is married with 
three children.  He has completed some college. He is employed with a defense 
contractor as a drafter.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with 
his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eleven debts, including unpaid taxes and tax liens totaling approximately 
$71,699.  There are also three judgments and five accounts that have been charged off 
or placed for collection, all totaling $5,652.  Applicant admits allegations 1.a., through 
1.e,.set forth in the SOR. He denies 1.f., through 1.m, and 2.a. and 2.b.  (Government 
Exhibit 1.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since September 2015. 
 
 Credit Reports of the Applicant dated August 29, 2015, and August 24, 2016, 
indicate that he is indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.  (Government 
Exhibits 4 and 5.) 
 
 Applicant stated that after he got married, his wife took care of filing the income 
tax returns.  When he learned that they had not been filed, he hired a law firm to assist 
him resolving his tax debt.  Letters from Applicant’s attorneys January 13, 2016, and 
 
3 
 
March 13, 2017, indicate that they are currently working with the Applicant to help him 
resolve his tax liabilities with the IRS.  The correspondence shows that the tax years 
being covered are from 2004 through 2014. 
     
 1.a.  Applicant failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2005 through 2011, 2013, and 2014 as required.  There is no documentary evidence to 
show that he has filed these tax returns.  
 
 1.b.  Applicant failed to timely filed his state income tax returns for at least tax 
years 2005 to 2011, and 2013, and 2014 as required.  There is no documentary 
evidence to show that he has filed these tax returns.   
 
 1.c.  Applicant is indebted to Federal tax authorities for unpaid taxes, interest, 
and penalties for tax years 2005 to 2011 and 2013 in the approximate amount of 
$40,474.   Applicant states that he is currently working with a tax firm to work out a 
payment plan with the IRS.  There is no documentary evidence to show that these taxes 
have been paid.   
 
 1.d.  Applicant is indebted to Federal tax authorities for a tax lien entered against 
him in October 2012 in the approximate amount of $9,531.  Applicant states that he is 
currently working with a tax firm to work out a payment plan with the IRS.  There is no 
documentary evidence to show that these taxes have been paid.   
 
 1.e.  Applicant is indebted to Federal tax authorities for a tax lien entered against 
him in October 2012 in the approximate amount of $21,694.  Applicant states that he is 
currently working with a tax firm to work out a payment plan with the IRS.  There is no 
documentary evidence to show that these taxes have been paid.   
 
 1.f.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor on an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $2,598.  Applicant denies the allegation.   The debt still shows 
on his credit report. 
 
 1.g.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical bill in the approximate 
amount of $877.  Applicant denies the allegation, and believes the debt is his wife’s.  
The debt still shows on his credit report. 
 
 1.h.  Applicant is indebted to a cellular telephone company for an account placed 
for collections in the approximate amount of $487.  Applicant denies the allegation.  The 
debt still shows on his credit report. 
 
 1.i.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account in the approximate 
amount of $181.  Applicant denies the allegation, and believes the debt is his wife’s.  
The debt still shows on his credit report. 
 
 1.j.  Applicant is indebted to a creditor for a medical account in the approximate 
amount of $18.  Applicant denies the allegation, and believes the debt is his wife’s.  The 
debt still shows on his credit report. 
 
4 
 
 
 1.k. A judgment was entered against the Applicant in June 2011 in the 
approximate amount of $813.  Applicant denies the allegation, and believes the debt is 
his wife’s.  The debt still shows on his credit report. 
 
 1.l.  A judgment was entered against the Applicant in September 2014 in the 
approximate amount of $443.  Applicant denies the allegation, and believes the debt is 
his wife’s.  The debt still shows on his credit report.   
 
 1.m.  A judgment was entered against the Applicant in September 2009 in the 
approximate amount of $235.  Applicant denies the allegation.  The debt still shows on 
his credit report.   
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.  Applicant denies the allegations set forth under this 
guideline. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), dated August 12, 2015. Section 26 asked about his Financial Record, 
specifically, whether in the past 7 years, has he failed to file or pay Federal, state or 
other taxes when required by law or ordinance?”  Applicant responded, “NO,”  This was 
a false answer.  Applicant failed to disclose his failure to file his Federal and state 
income tax returns discussed above.  (Government Exhibit 2.)   
   
 The same questionnaire, also in response to Section 26, asked the Applicant, “In 
the past seven years, have you had a lien placed against his property for failing to pay 
taxes or other debts?”  Applicant responded, “NO,” This was a false answer.  Applicant 
failed to list the lien that was entered against him for failing to pay his taxes.  
(Government Exhibit 2.)    
 
 Applicant explained that after he completed the security clearance application 
online, he learned that the website had been hacked, and that he needed to fill it out 
again.  He further stated that in between filing out this application, his mother passed 
away.  Applicant believes that his mother’s death distracted him from answering the 
questions correctly.  Applicant states that he was deeply depressed after losing his 
mother because they were close.  He admits that he did not fill out the application as 
detailed and as thorough as he did the first one.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  His excuses 
are not mitigating.     
 
Applicant failed to disclose in his August 2015 (e-QIP) that he failed to file taxes 
in the past seven years and that he had liens entered against him for failing to pay taxes 
in the past seven years.  Applicant has not provided any written documentation showing 
that he has even now filed his tax returns or that he has made any payments toward his 
 
5 
 
delinquent taxes and other debts.  There are no letters of recommendation from anyone 
attesting to his character, nor are there performance reviews demonstrating his 
competence level at work.  Under the circumstances, I find that his falsifications were 
deliberate, careless, and meant to be concealed from the Government.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for at least nine 
years, and he is indebted to the Federal Government for over $70,000. The prolonged 
nature of Applicant’s delinquent tax filings, and his unacceptable excuse for failing to file 
his taxes, shows unreliability, untrustworthiness and poor judgment.  He also continues 
to have a number of outstanding judgments, and is indebted for other consumer debt 
and medical services.  Applicant’s actions demonstrate both a history of and an inability 
or a unwillingness to satisfy his debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
 
7 
 
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Applicant provided no information concerning his financial affairs that 
demonstrate appropriate mitigation.  There is insufficient information in the record to 
substantiate that his tax matters and other debts have been resolved.  There is nothing 
in the record to show that he has filed his Federal and state income tax returns or paid 
his back taxes.  Thus, at this point, it can be assumed that all the debts remain owing.  
Given these circumstances, there is no evidence that he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly.  His actions demonstrate unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
8 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance application in response to 
the questions regarding his failure to file his back taxes and that he had liens entered 
against him for failing to pay taxes.  He did not answer the question truthfully.  There are 
no applicable conditions that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
   
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
