1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02853 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concern stemming from his contacts and interests in South Korea. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised a security concern under Guideline B for foreign influence.1 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 28, 2016, and requested a hearing to 
establish her eligibility for access to classified information. 
  
 On February 14, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was 
held. Applicant testified at the hearing, and the exhibits offered by the Government at the 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. (Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2; Applicant did not offer any exhibits.) The transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) was received on February 23, 2018.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-
4) establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position.”2 The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (hereinafter “new 
adjudicative guidelines” or “AG”), which are found in Appendix A to SEAD-4, are to be 
used in all security clearance cases decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.3 In light of 
this explicit direction (and absent lawful authority to the contrary), I have applied the new 
adjudicative guidelines. ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security 
clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards).4 DOD CAF 
adjudicators reviewed this case using the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines, 
dated September 1, 2006, which were then in effect. My decision and formal findings 
under the revised Guideline B would not be different under the 2006 Guideline.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            The SOR alleged under Guideline B that (1) Applicant’s five siblings and his 
mother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of South Korea; (2) from 1976 
until 1983, Applicant worked for a South Korean defense agency and maintains contact 
with the former director of that agency; (3) Applicant maintains a bank and a stock account 
in South Korea, each with an approximate value of $500; and (4) Applicant’s spouse owns 
an apartment in South Korea worth about $50,000. Applicant admitted those allegations.   
 
Applicant is 64 years old, was born in South Korea, and earned his bachelor’s 
degree from a South Korean university. He worked for a South Korean defense agency 
from April 1976 to June 1983 to fulfill his compulsory military obligation. During one year 
of that period, from June 1978 to June 1979, Applicant worked at an Air Force base in 
the United States in a scientific/engineering exchange program. In July 1983, Applicant 
came to the United States to pursue advanced studies. Between 1983 and 1987, he 
earned his master’s and his doctoral degrees at a prestigious U.S. technical university.5 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States continuously since first arriving in 1983. 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2000. He is married (since 1982) 
                                                          
2 SEAD-4, ¶ B, Purpose.  
 
3 SEAD-4, ¶ C, Applicability.  
 
4 See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (when the guidelines were last revised, 
the Board stated: “Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and 
agency policy, not without regard to them.”) 
 
5 Tr. 13-19.  
3 
 
to a naturalized U.S. citizen and has two adult children, both U.S. citizens. He owns his 
primary residence and a second home in another state. Applicant’s primary residence 
has about $30,000 in equity, and his second home has about $190,000 in equity. His total 
of retirement funds and annuities is about $500,000. Applicant’s total U.S. net worth is 
about $750,000.6  
 
Applicant has worked in the U.S. defense industry since 1987, over thirty years. 
This is the first time he has applied for a security clearance. Applicant has not needed a 
clearance in the past.7 
 
Both of Applicant’s parents are deceased. Neither one of them worked for the 
South Korean government or its military. Applicant has five siblings, a brother and four 
sisters, all of whom are citizens and residents of South Korea. His brother is now retired, 
and he worked for a private construction company. Applicant does not provide any 
financial support to his brother. His four sisters are retired. Two of them did not work 
outside the home. One sister worked for an electronics company as a secretary. The 
other sister was an elementary school teacher. None of his siblings have any ties to the 
South Korean government or its military.8 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. His mother-in-law and sister-in-law are 
citizens and residents of South Korea. His mother-in-law did not work outside the home. 
She supports herself with what she inherited from her late husband. Applicant’s sister-in-
law does not work outside the home. Her husband works for a private hospital and has 
no ties to the South Korean government or its military.9 
 
Applicant keeps in contact with his brother telephonically about quarterly. He 
maintains contact by telephone with two of his sisters about monthly and with his other 
two sisters about annually. Applicant keeps in contact with his in-laws about quarterly by 
telephone.10 
 
Applicant used to keep in contact with the individual who was the director of the 
South Korean defense agency where Applicant once worked, but he retired about two or 
three years ago. They were college undergraduate classmates. Applicant and his 
classmate communicate about once every three to four years to share alumni news, such 
                                                          
6 GE 1; Tr. 21-24.  
 
7 Tr. 19-21.  
 
8 Tr. 24-26.  
 
9 Tr. 26-27.  
 
10 GE 1.  
 
4 
 
as who has retired or died.11 Other than his family members and his former college 
classmate, Applicant maintains no other regular contacts in South Korea.12 
 
Applicant has a bank account in South Korea, but its balance is zero. It has to be 
closed in person. He no longer needs a bank account in South Korea. Applicant had a 
stock account, but he closed that account two years ago when he traveled to South Korea. 
That account also needed to be closed in person.13 
 
Applicant’s spouse owns an apartment in South Korea that her late father left to 
her when he died. She uses it to support her mother. When her mother dies, Applicant’s 
spouse will sell the apartment. The apartment is in Applicant’s spouse’s name only, not 
his. It is worth about $50,000. Neither Applicant nor his spouse own any other property in 
South Korea.14  
 
Administrative Notice (Republic of South Korea) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I have 
taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about South Korea:15 
 
South Korea, officially the Republic of Korea, is a self-governing state located in 
the southern part of the peninsula of Korea. The United States and South Korea share a 
long history of friendship and cooperation based on shared values and interests. The two 
countries work together to combat regional and global threats and to strengthen their 
economies. South Korea is now the United States’ sixth-largest trading partner with a 
trillion-dollar economy. The longstanding relationship between the United States and 
South Korea has brought positive rewards to the U.S. economy including more job 
opportunities for American. 
 
The South Korean government has generally respected the human rights of its 
citizens. Human rights problems, however, have been reported including: the 
government’s interpretations of national security and other laws limiting freedom of 
expression and restricting access to the internet; official corruption; the lack of 
comprehensive antidiscrimination laws; sexual and domestic violence; child prostitution; 
and trafficking in persons.  
 
South Korea is one of the seven countries most actively engaged in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States. Although South 
Korea is considered an ally, they have been the unauthorized recipient of technology 
                                                          
11 Tr. 27-28; Answer ¶ 1.d.  
 
12 Tr 31-32.  
 
13 Tr. 29.  
 
14 Tr. 30.  
 
15 GE 2.   
5 
 
controlled under U.S. export control laws, including material that could be used in missile 
delivery/reentry systems, encryption software, optics and prism data and infrared 
detectors and camera engines. Industrial espionage remains a high profile concern 
relating to South Korea and South Korean companies. In July 2014, a South Korean 
chemical company agreed to pay a criminal penalty of over 2 million dollars to resolve an 
investigation into the company’s attempted theft of a U.S. company’s trade secrets 
regarding a meta-aramid fiber used in protective fabrics, electrical insulation, and 
lightweight structural support for aircraft. Sources have also reported that South Korea 
may have attempted to compromise protected technology of U.S. F-15 fighters that it 
purchased. 
  
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
6 
 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. 
interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should consider the country 
in which the foreign contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, 
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect classified 
or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if 
that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the individual 
to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal conflict of 
interest. 
 
The guideline also notes several conditions in AG ¶ 8 that could mitigate security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
7 
 
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation; 
and,  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property      
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human- rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Because Applicant’s siblings and in-laws are 
citizens and residents of South Korea, which has a record of engaging in foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States, AG ¶ 7(a) 
applies. Those familial relationships also make AG ¶¶ 7(b) and (e) applicable.  
Applicant’s spouse’s ownership of real property in South Korea also triggers AG ¶ 7(f).16 
The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Applicant has lived continuously in the United States since 1983. He has worked 
in the U.S. defense industry since 1987. Applicant became a naturalized citizen in 2000. 
He and his spouse, also a naturalized U.S. citizen, have been married since 1982, and 
they have two adult children who are both U.S. citizens. Applicant owns his primary 
residence and a second home in a different state. His total U.S. assets are about 
$750,000. Applicant’s South Korean relatives have had no ties to the government or the 
military of South Korea. Applicant and his immediate family have deep and longstanding 
ties to the United States. It is unlikely that he will be placed in a position of having to 
                                                          
16 Applicant’s contacts with his former college classmate are so infrequent that AG ¶ 8(c) applies.  
  
8 
 
choose between his South Korean family members and the interests of the United States. 
In any event, should such a conflict arise, Applicant can be expected to resolve it in favor 
of the United States. AG¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply to mitigate the foreign influence.  
 
The apartment in South Korea owned by Applicant’s spouse has an estimated 
value of $50,000. That is a mere fraction of the total U.S. assets ($750,000) owned by 
Applicant and his spouse. That apartment, therefore, is unlikely to result in a conflict of 
interest that could be used to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) 
applies.   
 
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.17 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):         For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
