 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03276 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 21, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F, J, and 
G.1 The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
On January 20, 2017, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR, and 
requested the case be decided after a hearing before an administrative judge. (RSOR.) 
The case was assigned to this administrative judge on March 27, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 19, 2017, 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
scheduling the hearing for June 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled on 
that date.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered no 
documents into evidence. The record was left open until June 20, 2017, for receipt of 
additional documentation. No evidence was received. The transcript (Tr) was received 
on June 13, 3017. 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He is unmarried and he has no children. Applicant has 
a Master’s degree in business and a Bachelor’s degrees in Business Administration and 
a second in Integrated Supply Chain Management. He served in the United States 
Marine Corps from 1992 to 2004, when he received an Honorable discharge. Applicant 
has been employed by a defense contractor since 2005, where he works as an 
Intermediate Logistics Analyst, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection 
with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 5-6, 23-25.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
The SOR lists 22 allegations (1.a. through 1.v.) regarding financial difficulties, 
under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the SOR allegations were admitted by Applicant 
on his RSOR.  
 
1.a. and 1.b. allege that Applicant failed to file his Federal and State A tax returns 
for tax year 2015. At the hearing Applicant testified that he had still not filed his federal 
and State A tax returns for that year, nor had he attempted to get an extension to file 
late returns. Applicant also testified that at the time of the hearing on June 6, 2017, he 
had failed to file his Federal and State A tax returns for tax year 2016, which were 
overdue. Applicant stated that he did not file his Federal and state tax returns for those 
years because of financial difficulties, but he conceded it was irresponsible of him not to 
file. (Tr at 26-28.)  
 
 1.c. through 1.v. The rest of the allegations consist of 20 debts totaling 
approximately $59,000. At the hearing Applicant testified that he had made one 
payment of $150 on allegation 1.i., and he still owed $194 on that debt. Applicant 
offered no documentation to show that he had made a payment toward that or any other 
debt. He also thought that one of the debts for an education loan had been deferred to 
September 2017, and thus it would not be owing at the time of the hearing. However, 
 
3 
 
Applicant did not know which debt this was, and he furnished no documentation to 
establish that any debt was deferred.  
 
 Applicant testified that the reason for his delinquent debt was for medical 
reasons, primarily diabetes, and also because he helped other people by lending them 
money and they did not fulfill their obligations. He conceded that he never took any kind 
of financial counseling to help him be better able to handle his finances. (Tr at 34-39, 
57.)   
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR lists four allegations (2.a. through 2.d.) regarding Criminal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline J.:  
 
 2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in 2008, and charged 
with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs (DUI).  
 
 2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in 2011, and charged 
with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs (DUI).  
 
 2.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in 2012, and charged 
with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs (DUI).  
 
 2.d.  It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was arrested in 2014, and charged 
with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs (DUI) and Driving with a License 
Suspended or Revoked.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted all four of these allegations. Applicant 
attributed these arrests and convictions because of “partying,” being out with friends, 
and then just taking a chance and driving home afterward. He also attributed his 
drinking to stress from life. He conceded that it was irresponsible of him and “definitely 
life threatening for all of us that was [sic] involved at the time.” Applicant also added that 
he no longer drives after consuming alcohol. (Tr at 39-43.)  
 
Applicant testified that because of his fourth DUI in 2014, he has been placed on 
unsupervised probation for 10 years to 2024. He also conceded that he still owes the 
court approximately $3,000 for fines and fees for his 2014 DUI. This is not one of the 
debts listed on the SOR, and Applicant is also delinquent on this debt. (Tr at 61-65.)    
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR lists one allegation (3.a.) regarding Alcohol Consumption, under 
Adjudicative Guideline G.:  
 
 3.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct alleged in subparagraphs 
2.a. through 2.d., above, constitute excessive alcohol consumption. Applicant conceded 
that despite his four DUI arrests and convictions he still consumes alcohol, although not 
 
4 
 
as much as he used to consume. He claimed that he has never been diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent. He said he started drinking when he was in the military, and his goal 
was to drink “until you’re drunk fall down [sic].” (Tr at 68-69.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
6 
 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling. 
 
  Applicant has had multiple delinquent debts for several years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) are in this case. He also has not 
filed his Federal or state taxes for at least the last two tax years. Therefore, disqualifying 
condition (f) also applies in this case. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
` 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant attributed his delinquencies in part to medical issues. This is a 
circumstance beyond his control. However, since he has not established that any of his 
 
7 
 
debts has been resolved. I do not find that he has acted reasonably or responsibly with 
respect to his debts. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established, nor do I find 
that any of the other mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are applicable in this case.  
Therefore, Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is applicable:  
 
(a) evidence . . .  of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual 
was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted; and  
 
(c)  Individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Because of the four DUI arrests and convictions, especially the fourth and most 
recent DUI in 2014, for which Applicant will be on probation until 2024, the 
aforementioned disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 describes conditions that could mitigate a security concern. I do not find 
that any of the mitigating factors are applicable in this case. Applicant’s criminal past 
continues to cast doubt on his trustworthiness and judgment. I, therefore, find Guideline 
J against Applicant. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment of the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. After reviewing Applicant's four alcohol related incidents, the most recent in 
2014, and considering that Applicant continues to consume alcohol, I find that the 
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) in this case.   
 
(a) alcohol related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, . . . or other incidents of concern, regardless of the 
 
8 
 
frequency of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has 
been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired                                                                                  
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23. Because of the evidence introduced 
about Applicant's current continued alcohol consumption, after four DUIs, I find that no 
mitigating factor is applicable in this case, and I find against Applicant under Guideline 
G.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F, J, and G in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
9 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.-1.v.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
