 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04006 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on April 12, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 7, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for December 6, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 14, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old prospective employee of a defense contractor. His 
employment is contingent upon him receiving a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in 2004. He is married with three children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges 20 delinquent medical debts totaling $7,989 and 5 delinquent 
consumer debts totaling $3,227. The medical debts range from $60 to $2,922; and the 
consumer debts range from $421 to $1,058. Applicant admitted owing all the debts. 
They are also each listed on at least one credit report. 
 
 Applicant owned a home in State A. He bought another house to live in and kept 
the first house as an investment property. His renters did not pay the rent and damaged 
the property. He lost the rental property to foreclosure, but was able to maintain the 
house he lived in.2 
 
 Applicant took regular vacations to foreign countries. He reported foreign trips for 
tourism in 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2014. He stated that his mother-in-law paid for the 
trips.3 
 
 Applicant reported financial issues on his April 2016 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions, and he discussed his finances during his background interview in 
July 2016. He stated that he will pay his debts when he has the resources to do so.4 
 
 Applicant moved to his current state of residence (State B) in about October 
2016. He sold his home in State A, and earned about $217,000 from the sale. He 
bought a house in State B for $235,000. He used the $217,000 from the house sale plus 
some funds from his in-laws to buy the house for “cash,” without a mortgage loan. He 
stated that, with the foreclosure, he could not get a mortgage loan. He wanted a house 
with more land for his children. In about July 2017, he sold the first house in State B and 
bought another one at a short sale for about $195,000. After paying for some repairs on 
the second home, he essentially broke even on the sale of the first home and the 
purchase of the second. The second house is also unencumbered by a mortgage loan.5 
 
 Applicant stated that the medical debts were mostly copayments. He has not 
paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He stated that he is attempting to arrange 
payment plans for his debts. He has not received financial counseling. He has a full-
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-29, 43; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 20-21. The SOR did not allege the foreclosure. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not 
be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial 
situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 Tr. at 41; GE 1.  
 
4 GE 1, 2.  
 
5 Tr. at 8, 21-25.  
 
3 
 
time job with a company that is not related to his security clearance. He has more than 
$100,000 in deferred student loans. He noted that his credit score has increased; he 
paid a furniture store debt; and he is current on the $562 monthly payments on the loan 
for his wife’s 2016 car. His wife does not work outside the home, but he hopes that she 
will find a part-time job to help with the finances. He also stated that he may use his 
income tax refund to pay some of the debts.6 
 
Applicant submitted a letter attesting to his excellent job performance. He is 
praised for his reliability, leadership, technical proficiency, and trustworthiness.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 29-32, 37-46, 49; AE A.  
 
7 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has not paid his debts despite 
an apparent ability to do so. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant lost his rental property to foreclosure after his renters did not pay the 
rent and damaged the property. That accounts for the foreclosure, which was not 
alleged in the SOR, but it does not appear to be the major factor behind the debts 
alleged in the SOR. He took several trips to foreign countries; he bought two houses 
without mortgage loans; and he is paying the $562 monthly payments on the loan for his 
wife’s 2016 car. However, he has made no payments on any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR, and he has more than $100,000 in deferred student loans, which will have to be 
paid at some point.  
 
Applicant stated that he intended to pay his debts. Intentions to pay debts in the 
future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). I am unable 
to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
There are no applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
