 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01108 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 8, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 29, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on January 21, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 24, 2017, scheduling the hearing for March 6, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered 
documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through F and admitted 
without objection. The record was left open until April 28, 2017, for receipt of additional 
documentation. On April 27, 2017, Applicant offered AppX G, which was also admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 21, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR with explanations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since July of 2002, and has held a 
security clearance since about October of 2002. (GX 1 at pages 10 and 29.) He is 
married, and has a 19-year-old son, who attends college. (GX 1 at pages 14~15, and 
18, see also TR at page 19 line 22 to page 22 line 7.) Applicant attributes his past-due 
indebtedness to his wife becoming ill with “an esophageal hernia” in 2007. (TR at page 
22 line 12 to page 25 line 23, and at page 42 line 19 to page 44 line 8.) 
 
 1.a. It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to a bank, as the result a “cash 
advance,” in the amount of about $26,815. He has been paying on this admitted past-
due debt since about 2010; and in April of 2017, increased those monthly payments 
from $20 to $80. (TR at page 25 line 24 to page 32 line 19, and AppXs B and G.) This is 
evidenced by documentation regarding this creditor. (AppXs B and G.) As of January 
2017, the past-due amount had only been reduced to about $26,595; but with the $60 
monthly increase, the past-due amount should be reduced in the future. (AppX G.) It is 
further noted that this payment schedule is to the satisfaction of the creditor. (TR at 
page 25 line 24 to page 32 line 19, and AppXs B and G.) I find that Applicant is making 
a good-faith effort to address this debt. 
 
 1.b. It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to the same bank, as noted in ¶ 1.a. 
above, in the amount of about $7,766. He has been making monthly payments on this 
admitted past-due debt since about May of 2011. (TR at page 32 line 20 to page 35 line 
19, and AppX C.) This is evidenced by documentation regarding this creditor. (AppX C.) 
As of January 2017, the past-due amount had been reduced to about $7,166. (Id.) 
Again, this payment schedule is to the satisfaction of the creditor. (TR at page 32 line 20 
to page 35 line 19, and AppX C.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to 
address this debt. 
 
 1.c. It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to a department store in the amount of 
about $2,218. He has been making monthly payments of $50.40 on this admitted past-
due debt since about January of 2015. (TR at page 35 line 20 to page 36 line 10, and 
AppX D.) This is evidenced by documentation regarding this creditor. (AppX D.) As of 
March 2017, the past-due amount had been reduced to about $1,562. (Id.) This 
payment schedule is to the satisfaction of the creditor. (TR at page 35 line 20 to page 
 
3 
 
36 line 10, and AppX D.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to address 
this debt. 
 
 1.d. It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to a medical provider in the amount of 
about $344. He avers that he was unaware of this “Emergency Room” past-due debt 
until he “got a Credit Report,” as he thought that the hospital bill he had paid also 
covered the emergency room costs. (TR at page 36 line 11 to page 37 line 25.) He has 
since accepted a “payment plan” offered by the medical provider, as evidenced by that 
signed agreement (AppX E.) Payments were to begin in March of 2017, and in six 
months the debt would be paid as agreed. (Id.) I find that Applicant has made a good-
faith effort to address this debt. 
 
 1.e. It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to another medical provider in the 
amount of about $99. Through his testimony and written averment, I find that he is 
making a good-faith effort to address this rather small past-due debt. (TR at page 38 
lines 1~22, and AppX F.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due indebtedness. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past-due indebtedness is the direct result of his wife’s unforeseen 
medical condition, dating back to 2007. He has since addressed all of the alleged past-
due debts; and as such, there are clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved and are under control. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 2(b), and (d) have been 
established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Applicant is well respected in the 
workplace. (AppX A.) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
