KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: For each of these emails the Judge acknowledged receipt.  Given that Applicant sent
documents to the Judge on three separate occasions, yet the Judge cited to only two such
exhibits, we conclude that Applicant has made a prima facie showing that he provided
information that was not considered. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 16-03704.a1
DATE: 03/19/2018
DATE: March 19, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03704
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James F. Jacobson, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 29, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On December 14, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant submitted documents that
did not make it into the record and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant’s
SOR alleges a charged-off credit card debt for over $18,000.  Applicant claimed that the creditor
released this debt and that he paid taxes on the amount of the debt that the creditor had forgiven. 
The documents that Applicant submitted did not show that he had paid taxes as he claimed, and he
did not provide an IRS Form 1099-C.
The SOR also alleged a charged-off department store debt for a little over $2,000.  Applicant
contended that he paid taxes on the savings resulting from a release of liability, although he did not
provide an IRS Form 1099-C or a tax return showing that it was paid.  He did provide a 1099-C
showing that a $700 debt was cancelled, although he did not connect this debt to any allegation in
the SOR.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant relied primarily on the age of the two debts that the Judge found against him. 
However, the Judge noted that the fact that a debt may not be collectable provides little mitigating
benefit.  He stated that Applicant did not provide any proof of payments for these two debts,
correspondence with the creditors, any credible basis to dispute the debts, or evidence that he had
attempted to negotiate payment plans.  The Judge cited to Applicant’s military service and to his
having held a clearance during that time.  However, he concluded that Applicant had not provided
sufficient evidence of payment or other debt resolution, nor had he shown that he lacks the financial
ability to address the debts at issue here.
Discussion
Applicant contends that he submitted documents that did not make their way into the record. 
In making his argument, he presents new evidence, which we generally cannot consider.  Directive 
2
¶ E3.1.29.  However, we will consider new evidence insofar as it bears upon threshold issues such
as jurisdiction or due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.16-01129 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 7, 2017).
Applicant notes that, toward the end of the hearing, the Judge gave him additional time to
submit documentary evidence.  Tr. at 42.  The Judge stated in the Decision that Applicant submitted
two documents, which he marked as Applicant Exhibits A and B.  Applicant contends that he
submitted additional ones, however.  Attached to his brief is a series of email communications with
the Judge  which apparently contained documentary evidence.  One email, dated November 17,
2017, transmitted a credit report and another, dated November 6, transmitted a letter apparently
pertaining to one of the allegations that the Judge resolved in Applicant’s favor.  An earlier email,
dated October 16, 2017, stated that it contained “additional exhibits discussed on the record at the
. . . hearing in this matter.”  For each of these emails the Judge acknowledged receipt.  Given that
Applicant sent documents to the Judge on three separate occasions, yet the Judge cited to only two
such exhibits, we conclude that Applicant has made a prima facie showing that he provided
information that was not considered.  
Applicant has attached to his appeal brief documents that he contends he sent to the Judge
but that were not marked as evidence.  These attachments consist of two credit reports, a DD 214,
a state income tax return for 2009 and a Federal income tax return for 2010.
A review of the file shows that the only documents labeled A and B (and C) are the apparent
attachments to Applicant’s response to the SOR.  Given the Judge’s statements regarding post-
hearing exhibits A and B and the additional documents cited by Applicant as post-hearing
submissions, the Board concludes that the file in front of us is incomplete.
We remand the case for the Judge to contact the parties and establish a complete record.  The
record should have one system of enumerating Applicant’s submissions with no repeat entries.  The
Judge should then issue a new Decision in accordance with the Directive.
3
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
  
4
