KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline H
DIGEST: Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding “he used marijuana from August
1983 until at least June 2014, throughout a period of 31 years.” In this case, the sentences
following the challenged finding show that the Judge appropriately considered the nature and
scope of Applicant’s marijuana use as it is reflected in the record.  We resolve this issue
adversely to Applicant. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-03429.a1
DATE: 03/15/2018
DATE: March 15, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03429
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On November 30,
2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 48 years old, has been working for his current employer, a defense
contractor, since 2010.  He was granted a security clearance in 2010.  “Applicant admits that he used
marijuana from August 1983 until at least June 2014, throughout a period of 31 years.  He states that
after receiving his security clearance in 2010, he has not purchased or possessed any illegal drug
including marijuana.  He did use marijuana in 2014 in a private setting with close friends while on
vacation from work.  He further states that he does not use illegal drugs regularly, and never in a
work environment, during his weekly work routine, or amongst strangers.  His last use of marijuana
occurred in 2014.”  Decision at 2.
In 2015, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in which he responded
“No” to the question that asked whether he ever illegally used a controlled substance while
possessing a security clearance.  He stated that he forgot about his marijuana use in 2014 and did
not intend to be deceptive.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant used marijuana from 1983 to at least 2014 and used it while holding a security
clearance.   “There is no evidence in the record that Applicant has changed his association with
friends that use drugs, his environments where the drugs are used, nor has he provided a signed 
statement of intent to abstain from illegal drug use in the future.”  Decision at 5.
Applicant states that he misread the SCA question about whether he ever used any illegal
drug while possessing a security clearance.  He obviously knew his marijuana use in 2014 was
against the law and DoD policy when he deliberately falsified his SCA.  
Discussion
2
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding “he used marijuana from August 1983
until at least June 2014, throughout a period of 31 years.”  Id. at 2.  He argues the Judge’s finding
misrepresents his behavior and distorts the facts.  He points out that he occasionally used marijuana
before being granted a security clearance and used it only once since then.  When reviewing a
Judge’s decision, the Board does not review individual sentences in isolation, but rather considers
the Judge’s decision in its entirety to determine what findings the Judge made and what conclusions
the Judge reached.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-22311 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr.  4, 2003).  In this case,
the sentences following the challenged finding show that the Judge appropriately considered the
nature and scope of Applicant’s marijuana use as it is reflected in the record.  We resolve this issue
adversely to Applicant.  
Applicant contends  the Judge erred in making her finding about the amount of time that he
has worked for his current employer.  He claims that he has worked for his current employer since
1993, not 2010.  Although the Judge erred in this finding, such an error was harmless, i.e., an error
that is not likely to affect the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).  
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s conclusion that the record contains no evidence that
he has disassociated from his drug-using friends, that he avoids the environment were drugs are
used, or that he provided a signed statement of intent to abstain from illegal drug involvement.  He
states that he does not recall being asked to submit evidence on those matters.  The Judge’s
conclusion  relates to her analysis under mitigating condition 26(b)1 and is supported by record
evidence.  The burden was on Applicant to present mitigating evidence (see, Directive ¶ E3.1.15),
including any existing evidence that supported the favorable application of mitigating condition
26(b).2  Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take
timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014). 
1 Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 26(b) states: 
the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance misuse, provides evidence of
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not
limited to:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance
misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national
security eligibility[.]
2 During his personal subject interview, Applicant declined to provide the names of the individuals  with whom
he smoked marijuana in 2014.  See, Item 4 of Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material.
3
Applicant contends that his omission of his marijuana use in 2014 from his SCA was not
deliberate.  He claims he overlooked that marijuana use, which occurred less than a year before he
completed his SCA.  He also challenges the Judge’s conclusion that he has a long history of
marijuana use, pointing out that he used marijuana once in the past seven years.  Additionally, he
argues that the Judge did not properly apply the whole-person factors.  These arguments, however,
amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not enough to show
the Judge’s weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01717 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2017). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor  of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed; William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale              
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
