 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 16-03316 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated concerns pertaining to Guideline E (personal conduct); 
however, he was unable to mitigate concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F and 
E. On February 6, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 13, 2017, the Government submitted its written case. On March 20, 
2017, Applicant received a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM). He was 
afforded 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information. On October 16, 2017, the case 
was assigned to me. The Government exhibits, marked as Items 1 through 12, are 
admitted in evidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a and add SOR ¶ 1.f as follows: 
 
1.a – In or around October 1992, you filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. In or around 
February 1993, this Bankruptcy was discharged. 
 
1.f – You are indebted to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered against 
you in June 2016 in the approximate amount of $51,184.00. As of the date of this 
Statement of Reasons, the lien remains unpaid. 
 
Department Counsel further moved that Applicant provide answers to the 
foregoing allegations in his Response to the FORM, adding that if Applicant does not 
answer the foregoing allegations, that his silence be construed as denials. 
 
There being no response or objection from Applicant, Department Counsel’s 
motion to amend the SOR is granted. Furthermore, Applicant’s non-response to the 
FORM is construed as a denial to each of the two foregoing allegations.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, and consistent with the foregoing, the amended 
version of SOR ¶ 1.a will be construed as a denial. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 2.a. As noted, the added SOR ¶ 1.f will be construed as a denial. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old marketing manager employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2014. He seeks a public trust position with his current employment. Applicant 
graduated from high school in June 1984. He attended college on-line, but was not 
awarded a degree. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from June 1984 to June 1991, and 
was honorably discharged. He served in the U.S. Army Reserve from February 1993 to 
January 2010, at which time completed enough cumulative service to retire from the Army 
Reserve and was honorably discharged. Applicant was married from February 1989 to 
May 1990, and that marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in July 1993. Applicant did 
not list any children on his SF-86.  (Items 2, 3) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, the Amended SOR alleges a 2016 Federal tax lien for $51,184, 
a 2015 $13,962 state tax lien, a 2014 $26,473 judgment, a $2,075 charged-off account, 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 1992 and discharged in 1993, and a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filed in 2014 and converted to Chapter 7 and discharged in 2015. Total debt 
is $93,694. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f) These allegations are established through Applicant’s 
admission, in part, and through evidence presented. (GE 1 – 12) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a failed restaurant business. He 
states that he is on payment plans for the state tax lien and charged-off account, and that 
 
3 
                                         
 
the judgment was discharged in his most recent bankruptcy. Applicant failed to provide 
documentary evidence that he made payments toward any of the debts alleged. 
 
In conclusion, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his SOR allegations. He did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days 
from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely on this FORM.” As noted, 
Applicant did not submit evidence responsive to the FORM. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
in his June 2015 SF-86 that he had a state tax lien entered against him in 2015 and that 
he had a judgment filed against him in 2014. He claimed to be unaware of either. Applicant 
did list adverse information such as his Chapter 7 bankruptcy putting the Government on 
notice of his unfavorable financial history. (Items 1, 2) There is no record evidence to 
suggest that Applicant received notice of the lien or judgment. During his November 2015 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Personal Subject Interview (PSI), the 
investigator discussed numerous mistakes Applicant made when completing his SF-86 
to include discrepancies regarding his telephone number, address, education, 
employment, military history, references, family, and associates, etc. (Items 2, 3) Per 
Applicant, the OPM investigator advised him to “check with the courthouse due to 
potential of judgment.” (Items 2, 3)  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 
2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”;  “(c) a history 
of not meeting financial obligations;” and (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), 19(c), and 19(f), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists six potential mitigating conditions: 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s [trustworthiness] eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a [trust 
position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents evidence 
raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut 
or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard 
applicable in [public trust positions] is that articulated in Egan, supra. “Any 
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, 
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant has been gainfully 
employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature, responsible 
citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his long-standing financial 
problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to sensitive 
 
6 
                                         
 
information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. 
According, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his June 2015 SF-86 adding that he was 
unaware of the lien or judgment. He was open and forthcoming during his OPM PSI about 
his finances and readily acknowledged his omission. I also note that he made numerous 
other mistakes when completing his SF-86 that were apparently viewed as inadvertent.  
 
Based on the available information, it appears Applicant was confused or careless 
when completing his June 2015 SF-86. His lack of attention to detail cannot be imputed 
as a willful and deliberate attempt to undermine the investigative process. Although the 
information he provided about his past financial situation proved to be incorrect, as was 
other information he provided, I attribute these lapses to carelessness and am satisfied 
that he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose his delinquent debts with intent 
to deceive.1 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Unmitigated financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a public trust position to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a public trust position in the future. With more effort towards documented 
financial responsibility and compliance with applicable regulations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
In closing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record versus a hearing. In so 
doing, however, and with regard to financial considerations, he failed to submit sufficient 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances or articulate his position limiting my assessment that discussed in the 
FORM. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, and the 
AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns are mitigated; however, financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
