 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00513 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 8, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 6, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 
30, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on January 27, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 22, 2017. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record was left open until April 29, 2017, for receipt of additional documentation. 
Applicant presented two documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and 
B, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on March 1, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d. He denied SOR allegations ¶¶ 
1.a.~1.c., and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since August of 2014. (GX 1 at page 
10.) He has held a security clearance since 2005, as he was on active duty for ten years 
with the Army National Guard from 2002~2012. (GX 1 at pages 18 and 36~37.) 
Applicant received a medical discharge in 2012. (GX 1 at page 18.) He is married, and 
has three children. (GX 1 at pages 20, and 25~27.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a. Applicant denies that he has a past-due medical debt in the amount of about 
$19,028. He avers that this is his estranged father’s debt. Applicant and his father have 
the same name, with the father being “Senior,” and “Junior.” (TR at page 15 line 5 to 
page 15 line 17, and GX 1 at page 25.) Applicant has successfully contested this 
alleged debt; and as a result, it has been “deleted” from his TransUnion credit report. 
(AppX B at page 4.) 
 
 1.b. and 1.c. Applicant denies that he has past-due debts totaling about $2,305 to 
Creditor B. He also avers that these are his estranged father’s debts. (TR at page 15 
line 18 to page 17 line 6, and GX 1 at page 25.) Applicant has successfully contested 
these alleged debts; and as a result, they have been “deleted” from his TransUnion 
credit report. (AppX B at pages 1 and 3.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he owed Social Security about $13,577 in past-due 
indebtedness. When Applicant was medically discharged from active duty, he started to 
receive Social Security benefits. (TR at page 17 line 7 to page 19 line 5.) He became 
bored doing little or nothing while living on Social Security; and as a result, he “decided 
to go back to work.” (Id.) Applicant is thus required to pay back the Social Security 
benefits, which he has been doing by way of garnishment. (TR at page 17 line 7 to page 
19 line 5, and AppX B at page 7.) In 2016, he paid back about $9,598, as evidenced by 
a form from the Social Security Administration. (AppX B at page 6.) I find that Applicant 
is making a good-faith effort to address this debt. 
 
 1.e. Applicant denies that he has a past-due debt of about $2608 to Creditor E. 
He avers that this is his estranged father’s debts. (TR at page 15 line 18 to page 17 line 
 
3 
 
6, and GX 1 at page 25.) Applicant has successfully contested this alleged debt; and as 
a result, it has been “deleted” from his TransUnion credit report. (AppX B at page 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts. 
 
  Applicant has a past-due debt to the Social Security Administration. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are directly attributed to his military service, from 
which he was medically discharged. He is now paying down his Social Security debt. He 
has demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), and 20(e) have been established. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
