KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Appeal Board has previously held it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants
to present documentation about the resolution of specific debts. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-01679.a1
DATE: 03/08/2018
DATE: March 08, 2018
In Re:
----------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-01679
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On December 7, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 26 delinquent debts.  In her response to the SOR,
Applicant stated certain debts were paid in full and other debts were in payment arrangements.  She
also denied some debts.  However, she provided no documents to  support her claims.  She was later
sent Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) and was given the opportunity to
make objections and submit additional information.1  She did not submit a response to the FORM. 
In the decision, the Judge indicated that all of the alleged debts were established by credit reports
in the record or by Applicant’s admissions.  In his analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant provided
no documentary evidence of payments to alleged creditors or of debt disputes.  The Judge found in
favor of Applicant on some allegations and against her on others. 
In her appeal brief, Applicant claims the Judge erred in making findings that she was
delinquent on a student loan and that she did not seek financial counseling.  She also claims some
debts were paid, removed, disputed, or in payment arrangements.  The Appeal Board has previously
held it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the resolution
of specific debts.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016).  In this case,
Applicant has failed to identify any document in the record that supports her claims on appeal. 
Based upon our review, the Judge’s material findings “are supported by such relevant evidence as
a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  See, Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Applicant has failed to establish the Judge committed harmful error.  The Judge examined
the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
1 In the FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing six SOR allegations, changing the
amount of one alleged debt, and adding sixteen new allegations.  The Judge treated the amendment as a motion to amend
the SOR, and he granted the portion withdrawing the six SOR allegations but denied the portions seeking to change the
amount of a debt and to add new allegations.  Neither Department Counsel’s amendment to the SOR nor the Judge’s
treatment of it have been raised as an issue on appeal.   
2
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale            
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
