 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01052 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established that circumstances beyond his control contributed to his 
financial problems and that he has been acting responsibly under the circumstances. 
With his and his wife’s combined earnings, he should be able to pay for his family’s 
living expenses and current debts. His financial problems are being resolved. Clearance 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 5, 2015, 
seeking to retain the clearance required for his position. He was interviewed by a 
government background investigator on January 26, 2016. After reviewing the 
information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 23, 2016, alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on 
August 17, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on June 14, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 26, 2017, setting the hearing for July 14, 2017. At the hearing, the 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered seven exhibits (GE 1 through 7). Applicant testified and submitted 
four exhibits. (AE 1 through 4) AEs 3 and 4 were received post-hearing. All exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.n). He later disputed the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.g, which is the same account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, including his 
testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1980, and has no additional formal education. He married his wife in 
1980, and they have two sons, ages 36 and 32. His younger son is disabled and lives 
with Applicant. 
 
In 1980, Applicant’s current employer, a federal contractor, hired him as a 
shipbuilder. He has held a secret clearance continuously since 1980. There is no 
evidence showing his clearance has been suspended in the past, or of any security 
concerns, except for those in the current SOR. His current salary is about $69,500 a 
year. His take-home pay every two weeks is about $1,660. His wife also works and 
brings home about $550 every two weeks. Applicant testified he has about $3,100 in his 
checking account; $119 in savings; $29,000 in a 401k retirement account; and $137,000 
in a retirement account with his employer. 
 
In his March 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had failed to file his 2012 
income tax return, and that he owed past-due taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012. He 
also disclosed a delinquent loan and other consumer accounts. The background 
investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the debts alleged in the 
SOR that are established by Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence.  
 
In approximately August 1996, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection. He explained that he and his wife got into debt and he chose a bankruptcy 
proceeding where he could pay back the creditors. After about four years paying the 
creditors under the wage earner plan, the bankruptcy was discharged in about April 
2000. A 2003 security clearance investigation revealed Applicant had a federal tax lien 
for $18,215. Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing the lien was released, 
and that he had established a $250 payment installment agreement with the IRS. His 
clearance was continued. 
 
Concerning his 2011 debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), Applicant 
explained that for about five years he took too many deductions when he filed his 
income tax returns. At the end of the year, he did not have the money to pay his taxes 
and his tax debt accumulated to about $30,000. Applicant established a $256 
 
3 
 
 
installment payment agreement with the IRS. Applicant failed to file his 2012 income tax 
returns. He explained that his wife had been laid off from her job of 28 years, and she 
was unemployed for two years. Because of the reduced earnings, they were 
experiencing financial problems and he made the mistake of not filing his income tax 
return because he did not have the money to pay his taxes. 
 
Applicant filed his 2012 income tax returns in January 2016. His total debt to the 
IRS for tax years 2011 and 2012 was about $35,000. He established a $462 monthly 
installment agreement with the IRS in February 2016. He submitted evidence that he 
paid $462 in March and December 2016, and in January, March, and May 2017. (AE 1) 
 
Applicant testified that he had timely filed all his prior years’ income tax returns. 
He also hired an accounting firm to help him timely file his income tax returns in the 
future. He stated that his mistake was unlikely to repeat itself because he had learned 
from his mistake. Also, his wife was currently employed and with their increased 
earnings, he did not anticipate any future financial problems. 
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence showing that he paid the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in August 2016. (AE 1) He settled and paid the account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e in July 2017. He contacted the creditor and established a payment plan to 
pay the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, which was paid in July 2017. 
 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing he disputed the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g (same as SOR ¶ 1.n) in July 2017. He paid the accounts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 1.l in July 2017. (AE 4) He also paid the account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.m in January 2014. (AE 3) 
 
Applicant submitted a 2017 credit report reflecting 19 accounts. Of those, 17 
were in good standing, and two were identified as “Needs Attention.” One of the 
accounts needing attention is the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g that Applicant disputed. 
The other account is not alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented documentary 
evidence showing that he settled the account not alleged in the SOR, and he agreed to 
make four $249 payments, starting in July 2017.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that he should have been more responsible filing and 
paying his taxes. He understands the seriousness of the security concerns raised by his 
financial problems and is aware that he should have timely filed his income tax returns. 
He promised to do so in the future. Applicant highlighted his 36 years of employment 
with a federal contractor while holding a clearance without any issues or concerns, 
except for his financial problems. Applicant credibly promised to continue paying his 
legal debts and to resolve his financial problems. Applicant testified that his financial 
situation is now stable because his wife is working again and they were able to pay all 
of their delinquent accounts. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG. I 
decided this case under the AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
 
5 
 
 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He 
developed financial problems around 1996, and filed for a Chapter 13 wage earner 
repayment plan. He failed to timely file his federal income tax return for tax year 2012, 
and owed about $35,000 in federal taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012. He also had 10 
other delinquent accounts that he has since resolved. AG ¶ 19 provides three 
disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in 
this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . income tax as required.” The record 
established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
 All of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are raised by the 
facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are 
ongoing and recent because he is still paying his back taxes. However, his financial 
problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, circumstances beyond his 
control - his wife’s period of unemployment, the subsequent decrease in family 
earnings, and his inability to pay his debts and living expenses.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged he should have timely filed his 2012 income tax return, 
and that he should have been more responsible in addressing his tax obligations. He 
claimed too many deductions and accumulated a tax debt in 2011. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant established an installment payment agreement in 2012, and modified it to 
include his 2012 tax debt after he filed his 2012 income tax returns in 2016. He has 
been making irregular monthly payments on his agreement with the IRS, and applying 
his tax refunds to his IRS debt.  
 
 Applicant’s efforts to pay his tax debt are not ideal, but I find he is making a 
good-faith effort to resolve his tax debt. Applicant had paid or resolved all the other 
alleged SOR debts, except for the taxes. Even though he presented no evidence to 
show he has participated in financial counseling, considering the evidence as a whole, I 
find that there are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved or under 
control. 
 
 Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he settled or paid at least two of the 
alleged SOR accounts in 2016. He paid or established payment plans with other 
creditors in 2017. Many of Applicant’s payment agreements are recent, but they are 
evidence of Applicant’s responsible efforts to resolve his financial situation. 
  
 Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish that his financial problems were 
caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond his control. Considering the evidence 
as a whole, and including his recent actions, Applicant has been responsible under the 
circumstances. He disclosed his financial problems in his 2015 SCA. His financial 
situation is improving. With his job and his wife’s income, their earnings should be 
sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
the same federal contractor since 1980. He has held a clearance during most of his 
employment without any issues or concerns, except for his financial problems. 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to or aggravated his recent financial 
 
8 
 
 
problems. The record evidence is sufficient to establish that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control.  
 
The AGs do not require an Applicant to immediately resolve or pay each and 
every debt alleged in the SOR, to be debt free, or to resolve first the debts alleged in the 
SOR. An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. Applicant has implemented a plan to resolve 
his financial problems and he has made significant progress implementing his plan. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant demonstrated a track record of 
paying his financial obligations. The financial issues concerning his failure to file his 
income tax return were an isolated, aberrational event that is unlikely to recur. Applicant 
is aware that he has to timely file his income tax returns and to maintain financial 
responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. The financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
