 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03605 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tokay T. Hackett, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 10, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to an administrative judge on October 2, 2017, and reassigned to 
me on December 4, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
                                                     
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on December 7, 2017, scheduling the hearing for December 15, 
2017. Applicant waived the 15-day hearing notice requirement.2 
 
I appended to the record the Government’s exhibit list and discovery letter, and 
Applicant’s exhibit list, as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I, II, and III, respectively. I admitted 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
called four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, which I 
admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 28, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted in part and denied in part SOR ¶ 1.b and denied SOR ¶ 1.a.3 
He is 37 years old. He was born in the Dominican Republic (DR). He immigrated to the 
United States in 1994 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1995. He returned to the 
DR and graduated from high school in 1999. He enlisted and served in the U.S. military 
from 2003 to 2009 and deployed once. He was honorably discharged due to medical 
conditions and received a 30% disability rating from the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA). He started college for his bachelor’s degree in 2013 and was two 
semesters from completion as of the hearing. He married in 2004, and divorced and 
remarried in 2007. He has one minor child. He has owned his home since 2010.4  
 Applicant has worked as a cybersecurity engineer for a defense contractor since 
November 2015. He worked for prior defense contractors after his 2009 military 
discharge. In October 2014, he worked for the federal government until his voluntary 
resignation in lieu of being fired in September 2015, as further discussed below. He was 
first granted a security clearance in 2005.5  
 
 In late November 2014, on his first day in a special access program (SAP) with 
the federal government, Applicant was issued an SAP security violation. A coworker 
witnessed him improperly allow an uncleared individual use his login information for a 
sensitive computer network and leave the uncleared individual unattended in an SAP 
area in violation of escort protocol. Although he received security training, Applicant was 
new to SAP rules and regulations. At his lead’s direction, he allowed an individual, who 
was SAP-cleared for only two of three compartments, touch a particular compartment 
for which he was uncleared. Before doing so, Applicant inquired of his lead whether it 
was permissible and the lead told him that it was since the system was offline and 
detached from the network. Applicant denied allowing the individual to use his login 
credentials. He stated that the individual used the credentials given him by their lead, as 
Applicant did not yet have full credentials.6  
                                                     
2 Tr. at 9. 
 
3 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 11, 105-107. 
 
4 Tr. at 48-51, 54-55, 75-78, 98-99; GE 1; AE C, D, H, I.  
 
5 Tr. at 7-8, 77-78, 80-81, 98-99, 103-104; GE 1, 3; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant denied leaving the uncleared individual unattended in an SAP area. He 
acknowledged that he stepped away from the individual to grab a document, but stated 
that the individual was still in his line of sight. Since this incident, he better understands 
the SAP rules and acknowledged that he should not have stepped away from the 
individual at all.7  
 
 When Applicant was initially interviewed by his FSO, he denied that the 
uncleared individual improperly accessed a classified system at his lead’s direction and 
that he left the uncleared individual unattended in an SAP area. He did not want to 
blame his lead. He considered him a good man who saw Applicant’s potential, helped 
develop him, and assisted him with becoming a federal government civilian. He also 
wanted to first give notice to his lead that their FSO interviewed him and was intending 
on interviewing his lead. He walked out of the initial interview. He subsequently had a 
discussion with the uncleared individual, who reminded him that they had acted on their 
lead’s direction. He returned to the FSO and disclosed such. Applicant’s lead was also 
given a security violation and removed from the facility for giving the wrong guidance to 
his employees. This incident was later favorably adjudicated for Applicant, who was 
permitted to remain in the SAP area. He has not since had any other security infractions 
or violations.8 
 
 From 2012 to September 2015, Applicant’s wife worked for a defense contractor. 
In July 2015, she telephoned Applicant from work crying. She told him that a coworker, 
whom Applicant met one year prior through a mutual friend, was spreading rumors 
about her. Applicant was upset. He was overtaken by his emotions. He wanted to 
protect his wife. He three-way called the individual. He and his wife testified that he 
calmly told the individual not to talk about his wife or he would beat him up. They denied 
that Applicant referenced a “firearm,” “gun,” “shotgun,” “.45,” “bullet,” or any other similar 
language. Applicant did not intend to harm the individual. He did not see or talk to the 
individual after the call. His wife testified she and the coworker subsequently discussed 
the call and she reassured him that Applicant was upset because she was, but he was 
not going to do anything. The coworker indicated that he understood. She and the 
coworker had subsequent, work-related interactions that were friendly.9 
 
 Two months later in late September 2015, Applicant’s wife gave her employer 
her two weeks’ resignation notice, as she and Applicant planned to relocate their family 
in October 2015. Her employer accepted her resignation notice and told her that her last 
day would be the first of October. A few days later, she returned to her employer and 
asked that her resignation be rescinded because their relocation plans fell through. 
Applicant’s wife testified that her employer initially told her she could keep the job, but 
when she reported to work the following week they told her that they accepted her 
                                                                                                                                                                           
6 Tr. at 82-91, 104-109; GE 1, 2, 4, 6. 
 
7 Tr. at 82-91, 104-109; GE 1, 2, 4, 6; AE G. 
 
8 Tr. at 82-91, 104-109; GE 1, 2, 6.  
 
9 Tr. at 48-75, 78-81, 92-98, 101-103, 109-110; GE 1, 4, 6. 
 
4 
 
resignation due to her subpar work performance and gave her the option to continue to 
work for the remainder of the week or take paid leave. She elected to go home that day 
and return later to obtain her things.10 
 
 Documentation from Applicant’s wife’s then employer reflect that she was not told 
that she could keep her job. Rather, her supervisors informed her that they decided to 
keep her resignation. Upon doing so, she apparently became hysterical and called 
Applicant. Someone overheard him allegedly ask her the hours her bosses worked so 
that he could take care of things. Another account indicates that he allegedly 
telephoned someone and inquired about their hours of operation because he had a .45. 
Applicant’s reported behavior in this instance was not alleged in the SOR.11 
 
 Simultaneously, Applicant’s wife’s then employer learned about two prior 
incidents involving similar verbal threats made by Applicant to their employees. The first 
of which occurred in January 2015, in which there was a testy exchange between 
Applicant’s wife and two of her coworkers concerning an assignment she was tasked to 
perform. After the exchange, a third coworker told one of the two coworkers involved in 
the exchange that she reportedly called Applicant, and he allegedly stated that he was 
going to handle one of them. Applicant’s reported behavior in this instance was also not 
alleged in the SOR.12  
 
 The second incident involved the July 2015 incident discussed above. Applicant’s 
wife’s then employer learned that the individual involved did not immediately report the 
incident because he considered it a personal matter, and tasked the individual with 
writing a detailed account about the incident. In his September 30, 2015 statement, the 
individual reported that Applicant said, “If you don’t stop spreading your poison around 
the shop I will find you and I will break your legs, I have a 45 and a bullet with your 
name on it. Do I make myself clear.”13 
 
 The day after Applicant’s wife was told that her then employer accepted her 
resignation notice, a police officer served both her and Applicant with a no-trespass 
order from her then employer, prohibiting them from entering onto company property. 
They were surprised by the orders. The police officer informed them that Applicant’s 
wife’s coworker reported the July 2015 incident and alleged that Applicant threatened 
him with a gun or a bullet. This was the first and only time they were served with any 
such order. They abided by the orders and have not had any contact with the individual 
from the July 2015 incident. They were never issued a no-peace order, as it was denied 
by the court. No investigation was conducted and no criminal charges were brought 
against Applicant or his wife.14   
                                                     
10 Tr. at 48-75, 78-81, 92-98, 101-103, 109-110; GE 1, 4, 6. 
 
11 GE 6. 
 
12 GE 6. 
 
13 GE 6. 
 
14 Tr. at 48-75, 78-81, 92-98, 101-103, 109-110; GE 1, 2, 4, 5, 6; AE F. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant was in his one-year probationary period with the federal government 
when he was served with the no-trespass order. As such, he was given the option to 
resign in lieu of being fired. He was told that he was being terminated because he had 
threatened defense contractor employees, which he did not understand. He was not told 
that he was being terminated because he had threatened anyone with a firearm. He 
was not interviewed, there was no investigation, and he was not given the option to 
appeal his termination. An employment record reflects that despite his acceptable 
performance, Applicant was terminated because of his conduct in which he “made an 
unacceptable comment to a contractor.” His security clearance expired after he left the 
federal government.15 
 Applicant understood that he made an unacceptable threat in July 2015. He 
regretted his actions. Neither he nor his wife considered the implications on their 
careers or their security clearances. Despite their subsequent reemployment, they have 
struggled financially after they lost their jobs as a result of this incident. If he were to find 
himself in a similar situation now, he was adamant that he would avoid it. He testified 
that this was the only time he threatened to harm someone and he has never 
threatened anyone with a firearm.16   
 Applicant is loyal to the United States. He has a clean record. He stated that he 
learned his lesson and he would not do anything in the future to jeopardize his security 
clearance. His wife honorably served in the U.S. military from 2004 to 2012 and she has 
held a security clearance for 13 years. She met him during a deployment 12 years ago 
and they have been married for 10. She described him as loving and patriotic. She 
described the character of the former coworker involved in the July 2015 incident as 
questionable.17 
 
 Applicant’s three witnesses were aware of the SOR allegations. One of them was 
the assistant vice-president for his current defense contractor. Applicant was assigned 
as a technical expert to one of his cybersecurity projects in mid-2016. As such, he 
provided input into Applicant’s performance. He testified that Applicant has not had any 
performance-related, ethical, or other issues. He described Applicant as trustworthy and 
stated that he would work with Applicant again.18  
 
 Another of Applicant’s witnesses was the former vice-president of the cyber 
sector and Applicant’s former second-line supervisor for his current defense contractor, 
who has known Applicant since early 2016. He worked for another defense contractor 
as of the hearing, and served as the subject-matter expert in senior electronic warfare 
cyber and space. He also previously served in the U.S. military. He also testified that 
                                                     
15 Tr. at 78-81, 92-98, 101-103, 109-110; GE 1, 2, 3, 6. 
16 Tr. at 48-75, 95-101, 109-110; GE 6. 
 
17 Tr. at 48-75, 84; GE 6; AE D, E. 
 
18 Tr. at 40-48. 
 
6 
 
Applicant had no performance issues, possessed a strong work ethic, and was 
trustworthy. He stated that he would also work with Applicant again.19  
 
 Applicant’s final witness was a former coworker from 2011 to 2012 and a friend 
since that period. He was the security officer for the same contract Applicant previously 
worked, and so he oversaw the lab that Applicant ran for any security violations. He 
testified that Applicant ran his lab without issue. He testified that Applicant possessed a 
great work ethic and was trustworthy. He also stated that he would work with him 
again.20  
 
 Applicant’s numerous character references, to include a former military 
supervisor, members with whom he served, his current supervisor, current and former 
coworkers, and friends, described Applicant as a patriot, a veteran, a family man, a man 
of solid character, and a loving and caring individual. They attested to his 
trustworthiness. They stated that he is not a threat to national security.21   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                     
19 Tr. at 29-40. 
 
20 Tr. at 19-29. 
 
21 AE A. 
 
7 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
8 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
 Applicant had one security violation in 2014. In addition, he reportedly made a 
verbal threat in 2015 to his wife’s coworker. He denied ever making a verbal threat in 
which he referenced any kind of a firearm. Nonetheless, his conduct, in its totality, 
raises questions about his judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 17 describes the following potentially applicable mitigating conditions: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
I find that AG ¶ 17(c) applies to Applicant’s 2014 security violation. It was his only 
security violation during the lengthy period in which he held a security clearance. It 
happened on his first day in an SAP with the federal government. He followed the 
direction of his lead, who was also issued a security violation, in allowing an uncleared 
individual use a sensitive computer network. He acknowledged that he should not have 
left that uncleared individual unattended in an SAP area, in violation of escort protocol.  
 Concerning the three verbal threats Applicant reportedly made to his wife’s then-
coworkers in 2015, Applicant denied ever making a threat in which he referenced any 
kind of a firearm. Documentation from Applicant’s wife’s then employer reference   
statements from individuals who reportedly heard Applicant make the third threat in 
September 2015. Only after this incident did Applicant’s wife’s then employer learn and 
obtain statements from the individuals involved in the alleged January 2015 and June 
2015 threats. None of these threats were ever investigated or substantiated. Applicant 
was never criminally charged.  
Applicant acknowledged that he verbally threatened his wife’s former coworker in 
June 2015. I considered his demeanor at hearing, and he credibly testified that he was 
upset and overtaken by his emotions. He understood that his conduct was 
unacceptable. He regretted his actions. If he were to find himself in a similar situation 
again, he was adamant that he would avoid it. He learned his lesson and he would not 
do anything in the future to jeopardize his career or his security clearance. 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s character witnesses and references describe him as a man of solid 
character. They all attested to his trustworthiness. They stated that he is not a threat to 
national security. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) applies, in that while Applicant’s conduct 
was not minor, it occurred under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s demeanor at hearing. 
He was candid, credible, sincere, and remorseful.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
