 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-02010  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns, resulting 
from unpaid student loans and delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD 
after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective 
for decisions issued after that date.1  
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on December 9, 2016, and requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). 
(Item 2) On February 14, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by her on March 2, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant 
that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s Items. Hence, Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and single. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2008 and 
a law degree in 2012. Since 2012, she has worked for federal contractors. (Item 3) 
 
 On September 9, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). In it, she disclosed delinquent student loans and a repossessed automobile. She 
attributed the delinquent student loan debts to her grandmother’s bookkeeper who failed 
to make the payments. Her grandmother previously agreed to make Applicant’s student 
loan payments. (Item 5) 
 
 During a January 2015 interview, Applicant discussed the delinquent debts listed 
on her credit bureau report (CBR). She explained that she had been paying her student 
loans between 2012 and 2013. Her grandmother then agreed to make the payments and 
did so until she died in early 2014. Later in October 2014, Applicant learned that the 
student loans were in default and she then contacted the creditor. She stated that she 
began making payments that October and has made them since. She accepted 
responsibility for the delinquent loans. She said she and her mother resolved the 
automobile repossession. She was unfamiliar with other debts listed on her credit report. 
(Item 4) 
 
 Based on CBRs from May 2016 and October 2014, the SOR alleged 13 debts that 
became delinquent between 2010 and 2016, and totaled over $116,000. They included 
five student loans totaling almost $114,000 and eight other debts totaling about $2,000. 
(Item 5, Item 6)  
 
 In her December 2016 Answer, Applicant stated that she was making payments 
on the five student loans and had paid six of the alleged debts. She was investigating two 
other debts. (Item 2) Subsequently, Department Counsel notified her in the March 2017 
FORM that she had an opportunity to submit proof of her payments. She failed to do so; 
hence none of the 13 alleged debts are resolved.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. 
She did not provide a budget or other information related to her financial obligations from 
which to determine her current financial reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
 
 
4 
 
 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information.2  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2014 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under 
the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns.  
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant did not produce documentary evidence to establish any of the above 
mitigating conditions, despite asserting that she has been making payments on the 
student loans and has resolved other alleged debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
  
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including those discussed in the 
analysis of the financial considerations guideline. Applicant is a mature and educated 
individual, who is aware of the Government’s security concerns. She was informed after 
receipt of the FORM that the evidence she submitted in response to the SOR was 
insufficient to mitigate the allegations. Despite that notice, she did not provide additional 
proof of her assertions that she paid or was resolving all 13 delinquent debts. Overall, the 
absence of evidence creates sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
suitability for a security clearance. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:       Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
