 
  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 16-00908 
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michele Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Credit bureau reports dated March 2015 and July 2016 indicate that the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) filed a tax lien against Applicant in 2008 and in 2010. Two state 
tax agencies filed a tax lien against him in 2008 and in 2011. Two credit card accounts 
became delinquent in 2012. Although Applicant claimed he took steps to contact and 
resolve three of the debts, the only documented proof of resolving the delinquent debt 
was a $200 payment to one of the credit card creditors. Applicant has not mitigated the 
financial considerations guideline. Conversely, there is insufficient evidence to find 
against him under the personal conduct guideline. Eligibility for security clearance 
access is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. DOD issued to Applicant a 
 
  2 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated September 30, 2016, detailing security concerns 
raised by financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
While this case was pending a hearing, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), The guidelines were applicable to all individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Applicant provided his notarized answer on November 1, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 20, 
2017, for a hearing on October 3, 2017. I was reassigned the case for administrative 
reasons. The hearing was held as scheduled. The government’s three exhibits (GE) 1-3 
and Applicant’s 4 exhibits (AE) A-D were entered into evidence without objection.2 On 
October 19, 2017, Applicant submitted four post-hearing exhibits (AE F-I). By October 
27, 2017, after Applicant provided a clearer reproduction of AE G, the government 
indicated no objection to the post-hearing exhibits. DOHA received the transcript on 
October 11, 2017. The record closed on October 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR has six allegations under the financial considerations guideline and one 
allegation under the personal conduct guideline. Applicant denied the federal tax liens 
listed in SOR 1.a and 1.b. He claimed that he contacted his certified public accountant 
(CPA) to assist him in filing his taxes and was trying to find out why he was the object of 
the lien(s). He claimed that he talked to the government investigator who told him (they) 
looked into this and did not find anything (regarding the liens). Applicant claimed that his 
research into online resources revealed nothing. Applicant provided no independent 
documentation to confirm how the investigator and he determined the liens did not exist. 
(Applicant’s answer to the SOR; Tr. 40) 
 
Applicant essentially admitted that state tax lien alleged under SOR 1.c and 
claimed he contacted the state tax agency and discovered he owed the lien. He 
                                            
1 My decision in this case would be the same under the 2006 or 2017 guidelines. 
  
2 There is no AE E. (Tr. 10-13) 
 
  3 
 
categorically denied the tax lien identified in SOR 1.d. Concerning SOR 1.e which he 
denied, he explained that he had no recollection of the account. He denied SOR 1.f 
explaining that he disputed the debt and the creditor told him the debt was resolved. He 
advised that he would take immediate action to eradicate the debt. He changed his 
position regarding SOR 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. Applicant denied SOR 2.a indicating that he 
did not find out about the delinquent credit card accounts until the 2015 interview with 
the investigator after his February 2015 e-QIP. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 31, 58) 
 
Applicant is 40 years. He has been married since June 2017. His wife is an 
operations planner. He has 2 stepchildren, ages 10 and 14, and a 22-year-old son from 
a previous marriage. A defense contractor has employed him as a field service 
representative for the past one and a half years. His previous job was in a special 
tactics unit from May 2011 to about 2016. Before three months of unemployment in 
2011, he spent four years working for a defense contractor as a high-threat shift leader. 
Applicant was in the United States Marines from 1996 until his honorable discharge in 
December 2003. He has held a security clearance since 1996. (GE 1 at 12-17; Tr. 14-
16, 20) 
 
Applicant, while working for defense contractors between 2007 and October 
2017, was deployed to the Middle East six or seven times since 2007. He recalled that 
mail delivery from the U.S. was erratic and the mail did not reach him occasionally. On 
October 2, 2017, Applicant returned to the U.S. following a two-week deployment to the 
Middle East. He indicated that he tried to contact the IRS without success.  He tried to 
contact his CPA (who files his taxes) to obtain tax information related to some of the 
SOR allegations. The record contains no additional tax information or other 
documentation from the CPA. Applicant submitted his 2015 and 2016 federal and state 
tax returns as post-hearing exhibits. He prepared them himself and filed them 
electronically. (AE H, I; Tr. 17-20) 
 
From 2012 to his most recent two-week deployment in the Middle East 
(September-October 2017), Applicant’s employers had assigned him to only projects in 
the U.S. In February 2015, he completed and certified an e-QIP. In response to the 
financial section of the form (Section 26), Applicant answered “No” to all questions, but 
did reveal that he was trying to obtain more information about a tax lien filed against him 
by the state identified in SOR 1.c. Later in 2015, he provided an interview (PSI) to a 
government investigator and learned about all the debts (except for SOR 1.c) for the 
first time. (GE 1 at 33-34; Tr. 26, 39, 59-60)  
 
Financial Considerations  
 
SOR 1.a – A 2015 credit report shows that the IRS filed a tax lien against 
Applicant in October 2008.3 He denied responsibility for the lien. He believes he filed the 
                                            
3 The report lists Applicant’s Social Security Number (SSN) and several residential addresses 
where he resided in the past. The SSN and addresses match those furnished by Applicant in his e-QIP. 
(GE 1 at 7-11, GE 3 at 1) 
 
  4 
 
appropriate federal tax returns while on leave from his deployment in Middle East. He 
contacted the IRS and his CPA without success. Applicant provided no additional 
information. (GE 3 at 7; Tr. 21-23) 
 
SOR 1.b – A 2015 credit report shows that the IRS filed a tax lien against 
Applicant in June 2010. He denied responsibility for the lien. He indicated that he 
contacted his CPA and the IRS to seek more information without success. As with SOR 
1.a, he believes he filed the appropriate federal tax returns.  Applicant looked for his tax 
return records, but could not find them. Applicant provided no additional information. 
(GE 3 at 6; Tr. 24, 40-42) 
 
SOR 1.c – A 2016 federal report indicates that a state tax agency filed a lien 
against Applicant in May 2011. On October 2, 2017, he signed a payment plan request 
agreeing to pay $200 a month for the tax year 2007. The state must still authorize the 
request. He contended that he did not address SOR 1.c and the other debts sooner 
because he was in an out of the U.S. In addition, he did not believe he was responsible 
for the debts. He conceded that he forgot about the lien did not handle the debt as 
vigorously as he should have. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 24-27, 42-43) 
 
SOR 1.d – A 2015 credit report indicates that a state tax agency filed a tax lien 
against Applicant in December 2008. He does not believe he is responsible for the lien. 
He tried to contact the state tax agency in 2011, but was unsuccessful. He believed he 
was living in the state before 2008, and filed the appropriate tax returns. His e-QIP 
reflects that he lived in the state between 2003 and 2006. (GE 1 at 11; GE 3 at 6; Tr. 
27-28, 43) 
 
SOR 1.e – Credit card account opened in June 2008 and became delinquent in 
July 2012. Applicant received a corrected 1099-C Form in approximately August 2017, 
indicating the creditor decided to discontinue trying to collect on the debt. (AE C; Tr. 29, 
44) 
 
SOR 1.f – Credit card account for business purposes which Applicant opened in 
July 2006. The account became delinquent in September 2012. He thought he had paid 
and closed the account in 2011. Though he originally denied the debt in his November 
2016 answer to the SOR, the creditor informed that he owed the debt. He set up a 
payment plan and made his first $200 payment on October 2, 2017. (AE G; Tr. 29-30, 
45) 
 
Applicant recalled receiving financial counseling when he first joined the Marines 
in 1996. He has recently signed up to receive additional counseling. He promised to 
submit verification of his enrollment. There is no documentation of financial counseling 
in the record. (Tr. 32, 55) 
 
 
 
 
  5 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
On February 9, 2015, Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP. Under Section 
26 (Financial Record), he was asked whether in the past 7 years, he had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; and whether he had an account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or canceled for failing to pay as agreed. By answering “No” to 
the questions, he did not disclose the debts at SOR 1.e and 1.f. (SOR 2.a) (Tr. 31, 58) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s DD 214 indicate that he received: the Air Force Achievement Medal, 
Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal, 2nd Award; Navy and Marine Corp Achievement 
Medal with Gold Star; National Defense Service Medal; Meritorious Unit 
Commendation; Certificate of Commendation; Certificate of Appreciation 2nd Award; 
Meritorious Mast; Letter of Appreciation; and Rifle Expert Badge, 4th Award; Pistol 
Sharpshooter Badge; and a Good conduct Medal. (AE F) 
   
For the employment period of April 2016 through December 31, 2016, Applicant’s 
performance review comments by his supervisor were “highly motivated,” “dependable 
and trustworthy,” and “a model employee.” On October 2, 2017, Applicant signed and 
notarized a statement of intention to file and pay all federal and state taxes in the future. 
If he does not comply with his statement of intention, he consents to having his security 
clearance automatically revoked. (AE B, D, F)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are 
flexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied together with common sense and the general factors of the 
whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(d) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
  6 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
18. Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial 
distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from criminal 
activity, including espionage. 
 
19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
 When the SOR was issued in September 2016, Applicant owed $81,737 in 
delinquent debt to five creditors. About 94% of the debt are two federal tax liens. The 
liens, which are posted in the government’s 2015 and 2016 credit reports, Indicate that 
the federal liens were filed in  October 2008 and June 2010.4 The state liens were filed 
in December 2008 and May 2011. Except for documentation that indicates he made a 
$200 payment to the SOR 1.f credit card creditor on October 2, 2017, the other four 
liens are still unresolved, demonstrating a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), 19(f) apply. 
 
20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
                                            
4 Adverse information from credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence standard 
and Government’s obligations under E3.1.14. See, e.g. , ISCR Case No. 14-02403 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 
18, 2015); 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) 
 
  7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Though Applicant’s most recent debt became delinquent more than five years 
ago in 2012, all the liens and almost the entire debt to the SOR 1.f creditor remain 
unpaid.  Due to the large amount of federal tax debt, it is likely that the debts will 
continue into the future. Applicant’s inaction after learning in 2015 about the liens and 
delinquent debts raises ongoing questions about his trustworthiness and judgment. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s three-month period of unemployment in 2011 is a circumstance 
recognized under AG ¶ 20(b). However, he has been steadily employed for the last six 
years without any work-related disruption or any other unanticipated event. When he 
learned about his delinquent debts in 2015, he did not act responsibly to address his 
delinquent debts. Applicant receives no mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant receives no mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) because his only financial 
counseling occurred in 1996. While he claimed he was enrolled for future financial 
counseling, he provided no documentation of participation and there are no clear 
indications his financial problems are resolved or under control.  I draw the same 
conclusion under AG ¶ 20(d) as the evidence is devoid of any good-faith efforts by 
Applicant to repay his delinquent debts. The fact that Applicant no longer owes the SOR 
1.e creditor is not the result of a record of good-faith payments to resolve the debt, but 
the creditor’s decision to terminate additional collection efforts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because there is no evidence corroborating 
Applicant’s bald claim that he does not owe the federal tax liens and the one state tax 
claim in SOR 1.d. The mitigation due Applicant under AG ¶ 20(g) for his documented 
action to address the state tax lien in SOR 1.c must be weighed against the fact that the 
 
  8 
 
action was taken one day before the hearing, even though he was aware of the lien in 
2015.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
15. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following 
will normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 Applicant omitted relevant financial information from his February 2015 e-QIP 
when he answered “No” in Section 26 of having debts turned over to a collection agency 
or charged off in the last seven (7) years. He denied falsifying the answer because he 
did not know at the time he filled out the security form that he owed any debts. Providing 
false information on a government document raises concerns, but must be 
accompanied by an intent to mislead the Government about information used to 
determine security clearance suitability. The investigator informed Applicant about the 
two creditors (SOR 1.e and 1.f) later in 2015 after he submitted his e-QIP. However, 
there is no evidence that he received any prior collection or late payment notices from 
either credit card creditor before he submitted the February 2015 e-QIP, even though he 
was assigned to U.S. duty since 2012. Considering the evidence as a whole, I do not 
find sufficient evidence of a deliberate intent by Applicant to falsify his security 
clearance application. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply. Therefore, it is unnecessary to 
discuss the mitigating conditions under the guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have examined the evidence under the specific guidelines in the context of the 
nine general factors of the whole-person concept listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
  9 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant is married and has two stepchildren and a son from a previous 
marriage. His DD 214 shows that he received several awards and commendations for 
his honorable service in the U.S. Marine Corps between 1996 and 2003. His current 
supervisor praised Applicant’s job performance for the period between April and 
December 31, 2016. 
 
Weighing against the favorable evidence is the disqualifying evidence of 
Applicant’s delinquent debts that he accrued between October 2008 and July 2012. He 
was placed on notice during his PSI in 2015 that he had these federal and state tax 
liens, and credit card debts. Though he claimed he made follow-up phone calls to the 
IRS and his CPA shortly after the interview in 2015, he also acknowledged that he did 
not believe he owed the debts and that he neglected the debts. He received additional 
notice upon issuance of the SOR in September 2016, and he responded in November 
2016 that he was researching the liens with his CPA. He conceded at the October 2017 
hearing that he had done very little to resolve his debts since he submitted his 
November 2016 answer to the SOR. The documented $200 payment to the SOR 1.f 
creditor and the promise to pay the SOR 1.c creditor on the day before the hearing 
substantiates his observation. Viewing the evidence from an overall standpoint, 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the guideline for financial 
considerations. He has sufficiently mitigated the adverse evidence under the personal 
conduct guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
  10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
Paul J. Mason 
Administrative Judge 
