 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02766 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On January 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR in writing on February 20, 2017 
(Answer).2 (Item 3) He elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. On March 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items. Applicant received the FORM on May 5, 
2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted a 
Reply to the FORM, which contained additional exhibits. All Government’s Items and 
Applicant’s Reply are admitted into the record without objections. The case was assigned 
to me on October 1, 2017.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007. He began a 
position with a defense contractor in April 2013. Prior to this job, he worked for a public 
library. In his January 2016 SCA, he disclosed that he had delinquent debts, which 
accumulated after he encountered unanticipated expenses. (Item 4) During a February 
2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant acknowledged the delinquent 
debts listed on his credit report. He stated that at the end of 2013 he changed jobs, took 
a decrease in his salary, and had to pay more for medical insurance. He also was in an 
automobile accident, which required him to purchase a new car and added to his monthly 
expenses. (Item 5)  
  
 Based on a consolidated credit bureau report (CBR) from February 2016, the SOR 
alleged eight delinquent debts, which totaled $23,245 and became delinquent in 2015. All 
of the alleged debts are paid and resolved: 
  
 In November 2016, Applicant paid the $8,905 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a. (Reply) 
 
 In February 2017, Applicant completed payments on the $4,284 delinquent debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Reply)   
 
 In January 2017, Applicant paid the $3,350 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c: 
(Reply)  
 
 In November 2016, Applicant completed payments on the $1,457 credit card debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. (Reply)  
 
 In November 2016, Applicant completed payments on the $931 credit card debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. (Reply)  
 
 In February 2017, Applicant paid the $315 department store debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.f. (Reply)  
 
                                            
2 Applicant received the SOR on February 2, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 In January 2017, Applicant paid the $3,589 balance of the delinquent credit card 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. (Reply)  
 
 In February 2017, Applicant paid the $414 balance of the delinquent credit card 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. (Reply)  
 
 In December 2016, Applicant started a new position in another state at a higher 
salary, which helped him pay the above debts. He also borrowed money from his 401(k). 
His new employment has improved his financial status. He has not acquired any 
additional debt or opened new credit cards. He said within a year, his automobile and 
student loans will be fully paid and resolved. He is repaying his 401(k) loan. (Reply) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
 
 
 
 
4 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Two may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so. 
 
The eight SOR-alleged debts became delinquent in 2015, at which time Applicant 
was unable or unwilling to resolve them. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties. The following may 
potentially apply:  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts arose during 2015 because Applicant had previously 
incurred unanticipated expenses, for which he did not have sufficient income to pay. The 
evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), as those circumstances are unlikely to 
recur, as he is fully employed at a higher salary, and they do not cast doubt on his current 
trustworthiness and reliability. Those circumstances were beyond his control. Applicant 
did not provide information that he attempted to responsibly manage the debts while they 
were becoming delinquent, which is required to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant did not submit evidence that he participated in financial or credit 
counseling; however, there are clear indications that all alleged debts are resolved and 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant initiated an effort to resolve some of 
his debts prior to the issuance and receipt of the SOR; others were resolved immediately 
after its issuance. He sufficiently demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts 
through full payments or by payment plans. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
 
 
 
6 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Applicant’s financial problems arose during 
2015 and were resolved by early 2017. He appears to appreciate the significance that 
similar financial issues could have on his employment, as noted by full resolution of the 
debts. Over-all, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:           FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
 
         
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
