 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03116 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns related to her foreign passport, but failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from her continuing friends and family’s 
connections in Belarus. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national security 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of Case 
 
On January 15, 2016, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). On October 29, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) and B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
 
 
 
 
2 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the new AG were implemented 
and are effective for decisions issued after that dated.1  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 5, 2016, and requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1) 
On May 10, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by her on May 22, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that she 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant timely submitted additional information in response to the FORM that I 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. That response included a letter from her and hand-
written corrections to Item 3, which is the summary of her May 27, 2016 and June 2, 2016 
interviews with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), who 
prepared and submitted it as part of the Report of Investigation (ROI). Department 
Counsel had no objections to the corrections. Items 1, 2, 4 and 5 are admitted into 
evidence. AE A, which includes Item 3 with corrections, is admitted without an objection.   
 
I took administrative notice of the facts concerning Belarus that are set forth in the 
Government’s Request for Administrative Notice, which is marked as Item 5 and included 
in the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated 
into the following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She was born in Belarus.  She attended high school and 
college there, graduating with a bachelor’s degree in 1988. She immigrated to the United 
States in 1993 and was married here in 1999. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2005. She has owned her own business since 2005. (Item 2)  
 
 Applicant has been a dual citizen of Belarus and the United States, since becoming 
a U.S. citizen in 2005. She has a valid Belarus passport that she recently renewed. She 
has used it to travel to Belarus multiple times prior to and subsequent to becoming a U.S. 
citizen in 2005. She travels there about twice a year for two to four weeks. She uses that 
passport to enter and exit Belarus because it makes the process easier. She has also 
used it to travel to Russia. She does not intend to relinquish her Belarusian passport. A 
review of her current U.S. passport confirmed that she used her U.S. passport to exit the 
United States some of the times she traveled to Belarus. There is insufficient evidence 
documenting what passport she used to re-enter the United States on her many trips 
abroad. (Items 1-4) 
                                            
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2008, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
3 
       
 Applicant’s mother and father were born in Belarus. They now reside in the United 
States. Their citizenship status is unknown. Applicant has friends and cousins, aunts, 
uncles, nieces, and nephews who are citizens and residents of Belarus. She maintains 
contact with a couple friends, and visits them and her relatives when she visits Belarus 
every year. (Items 1-3) 
  
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
publications concerning Belarus, as outlined in Item 5, including the following: Belarus is 
an authoritarian government; it is a source and destination country for human trafficking; 
state-sponsored forced labor camps are prevalent; its judiciary is not independent; and it 
has a significant record for human rights violations and abuses. Belarus is also known to 
harbor terrorists, who plot attacks against other countries. Criminals in Belarus engage in 
cyber-attacks against the United States. The State Department warns U.S. citizens of the 
risks of travel there due to security forces abuses and arbitrary arrests. (Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
A person who applies for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants eligibility 
for access to classified information or assignment in sensitive duties. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides, “Any determination under this order adverse to 
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, 
Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 and 
                                            
2The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
Belarus has an authoritative government that engages in human rights violations, 
has human trafficking, and harbors terrorists. Criminals target the United States through 
cyber attacks.  U.S. citizens are warned about traveling there. These facts place a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her connections and 
relationships with family members and friends, who are resident citizens of Belarus, do 
not create a heightened risk of foreign influence or pose a security risk. Applicant’s family 
relationships with numerous relatives, who are citizens and residents there, are ongoing. 
Applicant offered no evidence to the contrary with respect to those relationships. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), shifting the 
burden to Applicant to prove mitigation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant did not demonstrate that it is unlikely that she could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual or government 
and those of the United States as a consequence of ongoing and long-term relationships 
with numerous family member and friends who reside in Belarus. In fact, she has 
consistently and frequently traveled to Belarus since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2005, and 
visited family and friends, indicating her close and ongoing connections to them. There is 
                                            
 
 
 
 
 
6 
no information addressing what, if any, direct connections her relatives or friends may 
have with the Belarusian government. There is insufficient evidence demonstrating that 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, such 
that if any conflict of interest arose, Applicant could be expected to resolve it in favor of 
U.S. interests. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation with respect to those 
relationships under AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), or (c). 
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference 
 
 The Foreign Preference guideline in effect at the time the SOR was issued 
included potentially disqualifying conditions relating to the exercise of rights or privileges 
of foreign citizenship, and possession or use of a foreign passport. The new Guideline C 
criteria, which came into effect on June 8, 2017, and controls this national security 
eligibility determination, explicitly states that the exercise of any right or privilege of foreign 
citizenship (including holding a foreign passport) is not disqualifying without an objective 
showing that it is in conflict with U.S. national interests or the individual attempts to 
conceal such facts. Although possession of a foreign passport is no longer a disqualifying 
condition, AG ¶ 10(c) provides the “failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting 
the U.S” is a disqualifying condition. Applicant admitted that she used her Belarusian 
passport to enter and exit Belarus and Russia, but there is insufficient evidence to prove 
that she used it when she exited and entered the United States for those trips. In fact, 
there is some evidence that she used her U.S. passport. Hence, no Guideline C foreign 
preference security concerns are raised or supported by substantial evidence in this case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do not 
 
 
 
 
7 
arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that are 
normal results of her family situation. Applicant is a mature person, who has been a 
naturalized citizen since 2005. Minimal information is known about her immediate family, 
including her parents, who reside in the United States, or other connections she has here.  
There is no evidence or allegation that she has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States. However, her ongoing relationships with relatives and 
friends, who are resident citizens of Belarus, create significant and ongoing potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant did not meet her 
burden to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns raised by the facts of this case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:        Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
 
________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
