 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-03184 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 9, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 12, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On November 15, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant signed his Answer to the SOR (Answer) on December 8, 2016, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2 at 62.)1 
On April 25, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, was 
provided to Applicant, who received the file on April 29, 2017.2  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions3 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 and married with two children. He has been employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2014 and seeks to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment. He has been deployed overseas as a translator for 
                                            
1 Applicant also signed his Answer on November 24, 2016, and February 7, 2017. (Item 2 at 10, 4 
respectively. All of Applicant’s 62-page Answer was considered by me in writing this Decision. 
  
2 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 7 is inadmissible. It 
is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on May 9, 2016. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or 
otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation (ROI) summary 
is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an authenticating witness. (See 
Executive Order 10865 § 5.) In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 7 is also cumulative. Applicant is not 
legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnote 1, which described 
the potential admissibility of Item 7. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially mitigating information that 
Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will be discussed 
later in this decision. 
 
3 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
various defense contractors since 2003, with the exception of a period of unemployment 
from December 2011 to April 2012. (Item 3 at Sections 13A, 16, 17.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.k in the SOR 
under this Paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. He did not admit or deny 
allegations 1.h, 1.j, and 1.p. I view his silence as denial of those allegations. He denied 
the remaining allegations. The total amount of money Applicant allegedly owes on all 
SOR-listed debts is approximately $36,718. The existence and amount of the debts is 
supported by credit reports dated June 12, 2014; December 18, 2014; and July 14, 
2016. (Items 6, 5, and 4.)  
 
 Applicant’s 62 page Answer contains what appears to be “cut and paste” 
excerpts from email communications, and other documents, from the law firm he hired 
to help repair his credit. However, he did not provide any specific documentation from 
any of his creditors concerning his debts with them, any payment arrangements he or 
the law firm has made about these debts, or the current status of his debts. 
 
 In his Answer at pages 6 and 30 Applicant appears to copy a payment page from 
the law firm he retained connected to some accounts. He also states on page 7 of his 
Answer that he is paying $100 a month towards the debts in SOR allegations 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, and 1.e, which are all owed to the same creditor. However, the partial account 
numbers in the Answer do not match any of the accounts in the SOR or on record credit 
reports. In addition, he did not provide legible supporting documentation that would 
demonstrate any such payment arrangement. 
 
 In his Answer Applicant states that his debt situation was partially caused by his 
wife’s nerve-damage surgery in around 2009, the fact that he moved several times in 
and out of the country and creditors documentation did not find him, credit accounts that 
were opened in his name but without his knowledge, the fact that other family members 
used his credit without his knowledge, and his reduced income due to 
underemployment and unemployment between 2011 and 2014. (See Item 7 at 4-5.) 
 
 The status of the debts, based on record evidence including Applicant’s 
admissions and explanations, is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $7,876 for a charged-off credit card 
account. Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement 
agreement. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing a medical creditor $5,520 for a past-due account. 
Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement agreement. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $4,506 for a charged-off credit card 
account. Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement 
agreement. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $4,124 for a charged-off credit card 
account. Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement 
agreement. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $2,360 for a charged-off credit card 
account. Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement 
agreement. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,726 for a past-due account, stating the 
account was not his. Item 4, a credit report dated July 14, 2016, states, “[Consumer] 
disputes – Reinvestigation in progress.” No further information was provided. I find that 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve this debt. This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,512 for a past-due account, stating the 
account was not his. Item 4 states, “Consumer disputes this account information.” No 
further information was provided. I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.h. Applicant did not answer the allegation stating that he owed a medical 
creditor $1,281 for a past-due account. Item 4 states, “[Consumer] disputes – 
Reinvestigation in progress.” No further information was provided. I find that Applicant 
has made a good faith-effort to resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.i. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,197 for a past-due account, stating the 
account was not his. Item 4 states, “Consumer disputes this account information.” No 
further information was provided. I find that Applicant has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.j. Applicant did not answer the allegation stating that he owed a creditor $868 
for a charged-off credit card account. Item 4 states, “Consumer disputes this account 
information.” No further information was provided. I find that Applicant has made a 
good-faith effort to resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $777 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant stated that this debt was being paid pursuant to a settlement agreement. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 1.l. Applicant denied owing a creditor $645 for a past-due account, stating that 
the account was not his. Item 4 shows this account as delinquent, and does not show 
that it is under dispute. No other information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.m. Applicant denied owing a creditor $475 for a charged-off account, stating 
that the account was not his. Item 4 shows this account as delinquent, and does not 
show it as under dispute. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.n. Applicant denied owing a creditor $315 for a past-due account. Item 4 states, 
“Consumer disputes this account information, [Consumer] disputes – Reinvestigation in 
progress.” No further information was provided. I find that Applicant has made a good- 
faith effort to resolve this debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.o. Applicant denied owing a creditor $136 for a past-due account, stating that it 
was not his. Item 4 shows that this is a delinquent government debt, and does not show 
it as under dispute. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.p. Applicant did not answer this allegation that he owed a creditor $129 for a 
charged-off account. Item 4 shows that this is a delinquent debt, and does not show it 
as under dispute. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.q. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,319 for a charged-off debt, stating that 
the account was not his. Items 4 and 5 indicate that this account was purchased by 
another lender. There is insufficient evidence to find that Applicant has a currently owing 
debt to this particular creditor. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.r. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,172 for a past-due debt, stating the 
account was not his. Item 5 shows the debt as due and owing as of December 18, 
2014. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.s. Applicant denied owing a creditor $780 for a past-due debt, stating the 
account was not his. Item 6 shows the debt as due and owing as of December 12, 
2014. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 Applicant elected not to respond to the FORM, even though Department Counsel 
repeatedly emphasized in the FORM that he should provide legible copies of original 
documentation to support the statements in his Answer. He submitted no documented 
financial information, such as a budget, from which to make a conclusion that he is now 
financially stable. 
 
 Applicant also did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on documentary evidence, had twelve delinquent accounts 
totaling $28,480 that he could not or chose not to resolve. As stated, allegations 1.f, 1.g, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.n, and 1.q were found for Applicant. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions, shifting burden to Applicant to demonstrate 
mitigation. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems have been in existence for many years. In addition, he 
provided no information to show that his current financial situation is stable. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant states that his debt situations were caused by several issues, including 
his wife’s illness, a substantial period of underemployment and unemployment between 
2011 and 2014, and possible identity theft. He has been working with a credit repair law 
firm for some time, but his decision not to submit substantiating documents makes it 
impossible to know with specificity what he has done in the long-term. Applicant states 
that he has made a settlement agreement, but the excerpts provided in his Answer are 
not sufficient to support that statement. AG ¶ 20(b) is minimally applicable. 
 
 As stated, it appears that Applicant is working with a law firm to resolve debtgs 
and correct his credit. He also states that the law firm has arranged a payment 
arrangement between him and several of his creditors. Once again, the lack of pertinent 
documents, and the somewhat haphazard arrangement of his Answer, make it 
impossible to find that such an agreement has been made, or that he is abiding by it. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) also have minimum applicability. 
 
 As stated, Applicant has disputed several of the debts, which is confirmed by the 
Government’s most recent credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those debts only. 
 
It is Applicant’s burden to show with sufficient evidence that he has mitigated the 
security concerns of his financial situation. He has not done so, for the reasons set forth 
in this decision. Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility was 
recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not 
demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
