 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02424 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 5) On June 14, 2017, Applicant responded 
to interrogatories (Item 7) sent to him by the Department of Defense (DOD). After 
reviewing the background investigation and Applicant’s answers to the interrogatories, 
DOD could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
September 26, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 
8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 24, 2017. He admitted the two 
allegations of failing to timely file federal income tax returns for tax years 2014 and 
2015, and the two allegations of failing to file state tax returns for the same years. He 
admitted a small medical delinquent debt. He requested that the matter be decided on 
the written record. (Item 4) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 13, 2017. (Item 10) Applicant received a complete file of relevant 
material (FORM) on November 20, 2017, and he was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. (Item 10) Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case 
on March 9, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 38 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1998. He has been a 
service technician for a defense contractor since January 2016. Prior to that job, he was 
a machinist in a shipyard from January 2013 until January 2016; an assembler at a 
home improvement store from January 2010 until January 2013; owned his own 
business from January 2006 until September 2009; was unemployed from May 2005 
until September 2005; worked for a city from September 2003 until April 2005; and was 
employed as machinist for a private business from October 2001 until August 2003. He 
left each job to either take a better job or because his employer’s business closed. He 
married for the first time in August 2004 and divorced in October 2007. He married for 
the second time in July 2010. He has one biological child and three stepchildren. He 
has never been granted eligibility for access to classified information. (Item 5, e-QIP, 
dated September 9, 2016) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that he did not timely file his 2014 and 
2015 federal and state tax returns. (SOR 1.a – 1.d) In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant states he is in the process of filing the returns. He tried to work with a tax-
preparer, but he believes they are a scam. Applicant also admits to a small delinquent 
medical debt. (SOR 1.e) He stated he intends to pay the debt. (Item 4, Response to 
SOR, dated October 24, 2017) 
  
 Applicant attributes his financial issues to his 2007 divorce, his period of 
unemployment in 2005, and the financial strain of providing for four children. Applicant 
noted his failure to file his state and federal tax returns for tax years 2014 on his 
September 9, 2016 e-QIP. He reported that he did not have enough funds withheld from 
his salary to pay the taxes, so he did not file the required return. He could not afford to 
pay tax because he had four children, one in college, to support. He stated he would get 
help from a tax prepare, and resolve the issue by the end of 2016. In his response to 
the SOR, Applicant notes that he is in the process of filing his 2015 federal and state tax 
 
3 
 
 
returns. Applicant did not provide any information that he actually filed his 2015 federal 
and state tax returns. 
 
 Applicant claims that he has a payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) to pay $100 a month for his 2013 taxes. He provided receipts for payments in May 
and June 2017. He provided information from his pay stubs to show three garnishments 
for tax purposes from his salary in 2013. He anticipates that the tax debt will be paid by 
November 2017. Applicant’s information shows that he is paying his 2013 federal 
income tax debt by both garnishment and direct payments to the IRS. However, he did 
not provide information to verify that the debt was paid and resolved.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant initially stated that he would dispute the 
medical debt at SOR 1.e because the medical provider did not do a good job. He then 
stated that he would pay the debt by the end of October 2017. Applicant did not provide 
any documents or information to establish that the debt was paid or resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. An individual 
who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18).  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet their financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his response to the SOR and to the interrogatories 
establishes that he failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2014 and 2015. He admitted to a delinquent medical debt. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant’s failed to timely file his federal and state tax returns for 2014 and 2015 
and his failure  to resolve a medical debt exhibits an inability and unwillingness to satisfy 
debts and meet his financial obligations. Once the Government has established the 
 
5 
 
 
adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the 
issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant admits he did not timely file his 
federal and state tax returns for at least two tax years because he did not have the 
funds to pay the taxes. He also did not have the funds to pay 2013 federal income 
taxes, but he is paying those taxes under a payment plan. The lack of funds to pay the 
taxes that are due does not relieve a person from timely filing returns. His lack of action 
to file the returns resulted in his financial problems being ongoing and recent, and not 
incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Applicant presented no 
evidence that he received financial counseling.  
 
Applicant has to establish his good-faith efforts to meet his financial obligations. 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant must act responsibly given his 
circumstances. He must establish that he has a reasonable plan to resolve financial 
problems, and that he has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s 
plan must show a systematic method of handling debts, and Applicant must establish a 
meaningful track record of tax filing. A meaningful track record of tax filing can be 
established by evidence of actually filing tax returns. A promise to timely file tax returns 
 
6 
 
 
is not a substitute for a track record of filing returns in a timely manner and acting in a 
financially responsible manner.  
 
Applicant knew when he completed his e-QIP in September 2016 that he had not 
filed his federal and state tax returns for 2014 and 2015. His knowledge was reinforced 
by his answers to the interrogatories in June 2017. He was again reminded of the 
requirement to timely file tax returns in the November 2017 FORM. In response to the 
FORM, Applicant still did not provide any information or documents to verify that he filed 
his 2014 and 2015 state and federal tax returns.  
 
 Failure to timely file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance 
with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified and sensitive 
information. A person who fails to fulfill his or her legal obligation to timely file tax 
returns does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required 
for a grant of access to classified or sensitive information. Even if an applicant attempts 
to correct the tax return problem, there must still be careful consideration of the 
applicant’s trustworthiness in view of his longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility by failing to timely file income tax returns. By failing to file state and 
federal tax returns for at least two years, Applicant did not demonstrate the high degree 
of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified or 
sensitive information  
 
 Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address the tax 
return allegations in the SOR. Tax return filing is a necessity. The fact that he merely did 
not file because he did not have sufficient funds to pay the taxes due, does not indicate 
that the Applicant is acting reasonably and reliably. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
documentation to show that he worked diligently to resolve the issues that was ongoing 
for at least two, if not three years. There is insufficient evidence to establish why 
Applicant was unable to make greater progress resolving his tax return problem. There 
is adequate evidence to show that he did not pay a small medical debt. There is 
insufficient assurance that his tax and financial problems are being resolved, are under 
control, and will not recur in the future. His lack of reasonable and responsible actions 
towards his tax return and his debts are a strong indication that he will not protect and 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Under all these circumstances, Applicant 
failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that he took reasonable and responsible 
action to resolve his tax and financial obligations. Applicant did not demonstrate 
appropriate management of his finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
He has not established his suitability for access to classified information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
