 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03694 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 14, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on November 
15, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 3 through 16. Applicant responded to the 
FORM, and submitted documents marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B.2 There 
were no objections to any of the evidence and Items 3 through 16 and AE A and B are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on February 13, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.n, 2.a and 2.b. He 
denied the remaining SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. On his October 2015 Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP), he disclosed that he graduated from high school in 2002 
and attended college from 2013 until October 2015. In November 2015, Applicant was 
interviewed by a government investigator. He disclosed to the investigator that he began 
attending University A in the summer of 2010 and earned a certificate of completion in a 
management course. He was asked by the investigator if he had any other educational 
activities within the last ten years or any other degrees or diplomas. He responded “no” 
to both questions. When applying for employment he listed on his resume that he 
attended University B in 2008 for four years and studied political science. He put a check 
under the box that says “degree.” He lists a different high school than the one he disclosed 
in his e-QIP. In the employment application, he also discloses that he has certificates for 
two years of teacher training and from a police academy for three months of study. He 
told the government investigator that he attended University C from 2005 to 2008, but he 
sued the school because it was an online scam, and he had been told by a judge that he 
should not mention this education on his resume or personal references since the matter 
was still in court proceedings. No other information was provided regarding the litigation.3  
 
 Applicant was married from 2002 to 2011. He married his second wife in 2011. He 
has six children, ages 14, 13, 11, 7, 6, and 4 years old.4  
 
Applicant disclosed in his e-QIP that he has been employed by a federal contractor 
since October 2015. He indicated he was self-employed from 2008 to 2015 as an 
interpreter. He also disclosed that he worked full time at other jobs during the following 
                                                          
 
2 AE A is four pages and AE B is 10 pages. 
 
3 Items 4 at 11-12, Item 5 at 5, 22, Item 14 at 2, 6. University B and C are likely the same as the names 
have one letter difference, but he lists that he attended these universities during the same time.  
 
4 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
periods: April 2013 to July 2014; September 2012 to December 2012; September 2008 
to October 2010; and April 2007 to September 2008. He lists one period of unemployment 
from February 2007 to April 2007.5 
 
Applicant explained his financial problems began in 2008 when he and his wife 
began having marital problems, and she no longer contributed to paying their bills. He 
also attributed his financial problems to their 2011 divorce.6  
 
Under Section 26 of Applicant’s e-QIP, he disclosed a delinquent child-support 
debt that began in 2008 and was paid in 2015. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges his child-support 
account is in collection ($3,338). In November 2015, Applicant disclosed to the 
government investigator that he has had difficulty paying the total amount of his court-
ordered child support. He said it was brought current in September 2015, but he was 
unable to pay the full amount since then. In his SOR answer, he admitted he was again 
behind in his child-support payments. He said he was working with the “local child support 
agency” but did not provide evidence as to the steps he was taking to resolve the debt. 
He indicated he uses his income tax refund to pay his child support. The debt is listed as 
in collection on his November 2015, November 2016, and October 2017 credit reports.7 
The debt is not resolved. 
 
In Applicant’s e-QIP, he disclosed the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
($824), 1.e ($347), 1.f ($243), 1.g ($230), 1.h ($153), 1.i ($119), 1.k ($541), 1.l ($2,192), 
and 1.m ($1,262). He noted that these debts were delinquent, charged off as bad debts, 
or in collection, and he was unable to pay them. He later denied some of these debts and 
others, indicating the accounts were fraudulent. The debts alleged in the SOR are 
supported by Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from November 2015, November 
2016, and October 2017.8 
 
During Applicant’s background interview, he acknowledged owing certain debts 
alleged and disputed other debts for various reasons. He then disputed the debts through 
a credit-monitoring service and provided documents with his answer to interrogatories 
that showed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h were deleted from at least one credit report. 
Other debts were either verified or new information was provided. As part of his SOR 
answer, he provided documents showing he disputed debts and some were removed by 
at least one credit bureau. They are the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 
and 1.o.9 These debts are resolved. 
 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Items 3, 5. 
 
7 Item 4, 7, 8, 9. The delinquent amount of the child support varies by credit report. 
 
8 Item 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 
 
9 Item 3, 5; AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
I was unable to determine if other accounts that were removed were debts alleged 
in the SOR because there were either multiple accounts or they had different amounts 
owed. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($119). A debt from the same creditor was 
deleted and although it is a different amount, it is likely the same account.10 This debt is 
resolved.  
 
It appears there are multiple accounts with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c. Two of these 
debts were removed from Applicant’s credit report. However, the evidence supports that 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was verified by the collection company in the documents Applicant 
provided in his FORM response. SOR ¶ 1.c is not resolved.11  
 
Applicant disclosed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e on his e-QIP. He told the government 
investigator that the debt was owed for lawyer’s fees from his 2011 divorce and that he 
intended to pay the account in the future. In his SOR answer, he admitted the debt, but 
was now disputing it. It remains an open account.12 It is unresolved. 
 
In his background interview Applicant acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f 
indicating it was a credit-card debt, and he was the individual owner. He told the 
investigator he disputed the account because he was never late in paying it. A 2015 credit 
reports show the debt was charged off in 2011. A 2016 credit report shows Applicant 
requested the account be closed and it was paid.13 This debt is resolved. 
 
Applicant disputed the account in SOR ¶ 1.m. Based on his FORM response 
documents, the account was not deleted and information was updated. It remains 
unresolved.14 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($4,520) is for a car loan and the amount alleged was for 
the remaining balance that was owed. Applicant disclosed this delinquent debt on his e-
QIP and indicated he was unable to pay the balance. He disclosed that he received a 
“profit and loss write-off” from the creditor. He did not provide a copy of the document. He 
told the investigator that he was unable to make the car payments when his wife no longer 
contributed to the family income. The account was held in his name only. He voluntarily 
returned the vehicle to the dealer. He told the investigator that he disputed the amount 
owed because the car was sold and there was no deficiency. He did not provide 
supporting documents.15 It is not resolved.  
 
                                                          
10 Items 3, 4, 5; AE B. 
 
11 Items 3, 5, 8, AE B. 
 
12 Items 3, 5. 
 
13 Items 3, 5. 
  
14 AE B. 
 
15 Items 4, 5. 
 
5 
 
 
In 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with injury to a child. On his 
November 2015 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed he was charged with this offense. Court 
records show he pleaded guilty to the offense. He paid a fine and the charge was later 
dismissed. Applicant left his minor children unattended in his car.16   
 
In approximately June 2011, Applicant was charged with contempt of court. He 
was convicted and served approximately 15 days in jail. Applicant did not disclose this 
conviction on his November 2015 e-QIP. Applicant explained in his SOR answer that this 
conviction was not a separate crime, but was part of his failure to pay his child support 
and that he elected to go to jail. Court documents reflect his conviction and sentence.17 
 
In February 2013, Applicant was charged with contempt of court. He was convicted 
and served approximately two days in jail. Applicant denied this allegation explaining it 
was not a new crime and again pertained to his court-ordered child support. As part of an 
employment screening interview document, Applicant wrote that he went to jail for two 
days because he “did not follow what the judge said.”18 He further stated he had difficulty 
making his child support payments because he did not have a job. Applicant did not 
disclose this conviction on his e-QIP.19  
 
In July 2014, Applicant was charged with driving with a suspended license. He was 
convicted of the offense. He did not disclose this information on his e-QIP. Applicant 
denied he was convicted of this offense. He indicated he was stopped by a police office 
in State A and was told his driver’s license was suspended in State B. He stated he wrote 
a letter to State B to verify the information and did not receive a response. In his SOR 
answer, he provided a copy of a ticket that indicated the time, place, and date he should 
appear in court. He stated in his answer that he was not asked to appear in any courtroom. 
He denied his license was suspended.  
 
In Applicant’s Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaire the 
investigator questioned Applicant about a November 2013 ticket. The investigator noted 
that Applicant disclosed he received a letter from State B Department of Transportation 
(DOT) that his driver’s license was suspended. He told the investigator that he provided 
payment to the DOT and his license was reinstated. He told the investigator that his State 
B driver’s license was reinstated in May 2015 and he never drove on a suspended license. 
Applicant was unable to provide the investigator proof of his reinstated license from State 
B.  
 
The investigator then asked Applicant about the July 2014 driving on a suspended 
license ticket. He denied the charge to the investigator. He was asked if he ever drove on 
                                                          
16 Items 4, 5, 11, 12. 
 
17 Items 3, 5, 10, 12. 
 
18 Items 10, 16. 
 
19 Items 12, 16. 
 
6 
 
 
a suspended license. He answered “no.” Inconsistent statements raise credibility issues. 
In this instance, Applicant gave several different answers until he admitted to the two 
arrests above.20 
 
Documents from Applicant’s former employer in November 2012 show that it 
learned in late October 2012 that Applicant had a suspended driver’s license. Applicant 
was counseled by a case manager that he could not drive their clients without a valid 
driver’s license. Applicant told the case manager that he would take care of it immediately. 
Documents reflect that after his meeting, he made a payment to the DOT to reinstate his 
license.21  
 
During his background interview with a government investigator, Applicant denied 
he was confronted by his employer about driving on a suspended license despite 
information from the employer that it had verified on at least three occasions that his 
license was suspended. He denied this information, and said there must be a mistake 
with the website it checked. He denied he was terminated from this job. Documents reflect 
he was involuntarily terminated due to policy violations. He told the investigator he was 
terminated due to funding issues.22 
 
In September 2015, Applicant was charged with a felony for falsify by offering 
forged or fraudulent documents. The charges were later dismissed. Applicant admitted 
he was charged with the offense, but denied he committed the offense. He explained his 
ex-wife was responsible for the allegations. The case was dismissed for lack of 
evidence.23  
 
The SOR alleges in ¶ 2.g that during Applicant’s November 23, 2015 interview with 
a government investigator he intentionally failed to disclose that he had been charged, 
convicted, or sentenced to any crime within the past seven years except the 2009 child 
endangerment offense. Specifically he intentionally failed to disclose his two contempt of 
court convictions and driving on a suspended license offense. Applicant denied the 
allegation. He stated he believed the two contempt charges were part of his divorce, and 
he has never had his license suspended in State A. There is sufficient evidence that his 
license was suspended in State B due to child support issues and that he had it reinstated 
as part of his job requirements. Although he may have been confused about the contempt 
of court issues because they dealt with his failure to pay his child support, the fact that he 
went to jail for 15 days and 2 days on separate occasions reinforces that his actions were 
criminal in nature and subject to disclosure. It is not reasonable to believe that Applicant 
served time in jail and did not believe he was required to disclose this information. In 
                                                          
20 Item 6.  
 
21 Items 14, 15. 
 
22 Item 5. I have not considered for disqualification purposes any derogatory information that was not 
alleged in the SOR. I may consider it when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in my whole-person analysis.  
 
23 Item 3. 
 
7 
 
 
addition, there is substantial evidence of a continuing pattern of inconsistent statements 
and dishonesty regarding Applicant’s suspended license. I conclude Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose this information.24  
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated he misunderstood the e-QIP and made 
mistakes. His reiterated that his divorce was difficult. He asked for a chance to prove 
himself. He stated that he made some bad choices when some of his accounts went to 
collection, but he had to prioritize his family’s needs and take care of his children.25 
 
Applicant provided character letters with his SOR answer. In them he is described 
as a dedicated family man. He is considered trustworthy, passionate, caring, reliable, 
hardworking, punctual and honest.26 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
24 Items 14, 15. 
 
25 Item 3, AE A. 
 
26 Item 3. 
 
8 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent accounts dating back to at least 2010. 
The evidence supports the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant admitted owing many of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, and 
then later he disputed some. He has resolved many of the debts by disputing them, but 
his delinquent child-support obligations remain a recurring problem. He has some 
remaining delinquent debts. His financial issues are ongoing. He did not provide evidence 
regarding his current finances, his ability to pay his delinquent debts, or a plan for 
remaining current with his child-support obligations. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude his financial problems are unlikely to recur. This conduct raises questions about 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to overcome these concerns. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s failure to contribute to the 
family income beginning in 2008 and their subsequent divorce in 2011. These were 
conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has disputed many of the alleged 
debts, and they have been removed from his credit report. However, he is still resolving 
others. Of particular concern is his child-support obligation which is an ongoing problem. 
 
10 
 
 
It has been seven years since his divorce, and he has been employed during this period, 
yet he still has outstanding child-support obligations. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence that he has resolved this obligation despite his comments that this is his priority. 
I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling and there 
are not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is evidence that Applicant resolved many of his debts 
by disputing them on his credit report. No evidence was presented to show Applicant has 
initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve the debts that remain. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed many of the debts alleged in the SOR, even those he disclosed 
on his e-QIP and stated he was unable to pay. Many have been removed from his credit 
report and are resolved as indicated in my findings of fact. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those as 
noted above.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 16, and three that may be 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
 
11 
 
 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence and conclude Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose his criminal contempt arrests and convictions and driving with a suspended 
license arrest on his e-QIP and later falsified material facts when he was interviewed by 
a government investigator by denying he had been charged, convicted, or sentenced for 
any crime in the last seven years. Applicant’s failure to pay his child-support obligations 
that relate to his criminal contempt convictions are a concern. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(a). There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions. Applicant did not disclose the required information on his e-QIP and when he 
was specifically questioned by the government investigator about whether he was 
charged, convicted, or sentenced for any crime within the last years he failed to disclose 
his criminal contempt charges. I have considered his explanation that he was confused 
because his contempt charges related to his divorce. Applicant spent 15 days in jail and 
then spent another 2 days in jail. Regardless of the reason, it is not believable that he did 
not think he had to disclose this information. The evidence is sufficient to support 
Applicant was aware of his suspended driver’s license and his attempts to conceal this 
information. I did not find Applicant’s explanations credible.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because deliberately failing to disclose information on 
a SCA is not a minor offense. Failing to be honest during an interview with a government 
investigator is not minor. I find Applicant’s omissions are serious and cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He is the father of six children and has been held in 
contempt of court twice and been sentenced to jail for failing to pay his child-support 
obligation, which remains in a collection status. He has other delinquent debts he is still 
resolving. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his past conduct on his e-QIP and 
during his background interview as was required. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.l:  For Applicant 
 
13 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.o:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
