                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 16-00151
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I grant Applicant’s clearance.1
On 16 June 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an SOR to Applicant
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  Applicant timely2
answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 7 April 2017, and I convened a
Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibit (GE) 1, hearing exhibits (HE) I-II, and Applicant exhibits1
A-D.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. However, on 10 December 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) signed
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, implementing new AG, effective with any decision issued on or after 8
June 2017. My decision is the same under both guidelines.
1
hearing 25 May 2017. DOHA received the transcript 2 June 2017, and the record
closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. He is a 42-year-old systems
administrator employed by a defense contractor since October 2002. He has not
previously held a clearance, but underwent a background investigation in July 2009 to
allow him to perform his computer duties with the United States (U.S.) military medical
school.
Applicant was born in the Republic of China (Taiwan) in February 1975. He grew
up there and was educated there until he was 12-years-old. In 1987, his parents, along
with Applicant and his younger brother and sister, immigrated to Canada because his
parents thought the children would have greater opportunities in Canada than in
Taiwan. The entire family acquired Canadian citizenship. Applicant completed high
school in Canada, and attended college in Canada. He immigrated to the U.S. in 1999
to attend graduate school from August 1999 to April 2001, obtaining his master’s degree
in computer science. There, he met his wife, a native of Malaysia. They married in July
2002, and have two sons, native-born U.S. citizens, born in June 2004 and July 2006.
Applicant became a legal permanent resident of the U.S. in April 2009, and
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2014. He obtained his U.S. passport in July
2016. He renewed his Canadian passport in March 2011, a passport that under U.S.
immigration law, he was required to maintain while he remained a legally-resident alien
in the U.S. He also renewed his Taiwanese passport in April 2014. He states that he
has surrendered both foreign passports to his security officer (Tr. 36).
Applicant’s 67-year old mother and 70-year-old father are dual citizens of Taiwan
and Canada, currently residing in Taiwan. They returned to Taiwan in 2008, because
Applicant’s grandfather died that year, and his grandmother had previously suffered a
stroke, and needed Applicant’s parents to care for her. Applicant’s grandmother died in
2015. Applicant’s siblings live in Canada and each has two children, younger than
Applicant’s children.
When Applicant’s grandmother was alive, he and his family traveled to Taiwan to
visit her and his parents. Since her death, Applicant has not returned to Taiwan. 
Applicant’s father is a retired textile salesman and his mother is a life-long
housewife. They are both avid golfers, and travel extensively to pursue their avocation
in Asia and play golf and visit their grandchildren in the U.S. and Canada. Right now,
the Canadian grandchildren are the favorites, as a toddler and an infant are cuter than
two pre-teen boys. Applicant has monthly contact with his parents, either by telephone
or video connection, but they travel to the U.S. and Canada every year now. Applicant
anticipates that they will return to Canada to live near his sister when their traveling
days are over.
2
Applicant and his wife have no financial interests in Taiwan. They have $200,000
annual income, consisting of their two salaries, plus some net income from a rental
property. They estimate their net worth at $1,300,000, consisting of a retirement plan
and the equity in their residence and a rental property (AE A). Applicant’s oldest son is
heavily involved in youth hockey, and the youngest is an active participant in the Boy
Scouts (AE D).
Taiwan is a multiparty democracy, whose authorities generally respect the
human rights of its citizens. While Taiwan is an active collector of industrial information
and engages in industrial espionage, the record does not demonstrate that the
government of Taiwan targets U.S. intelligence information. Further, the record does not
demonstrate that it seeks to exert pressure on U.S. citizens to collect information from
family members residing in country or abroad. The U.S. does not have formal diplomatic
relations with Taiwan, but maintains a substantial informal relationship. The
Government acknowledges that the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has not yet
successfully integrated what it considers to be a renegade province (HE I)
Applicant’s current supervisor—the Chief Knowledge Officer at the medical
school, who was responsible for Applicant’s 2009 transfer to the school information
division—praises his exceptional work performance and highly recommends him for his
clearance. A former supervisor at the school recommends him with similar praise, as
does a co-worker, and a neighbor (AE C). They noted no issue with Applicant’s handling
of sensitive medical information. Applicant has been recognized at work for his positive
contributions to the hospital’s mission (AE B).
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
3
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information4
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  In5
addition, security concerns may be raised by a substantial business, financial, or
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation.6
In this case, the government did not establish that Applicant’s contacts with his
family in Taiwan created a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion. Taiwan and the U.S. enjoy excellent foreign relations. Although
Taiwan is an active collector of commercial information, it has not been demonstrated to
target protected U.S. information, nor has it been demonstrated to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information. Given that Taiwan generally respects the human rights of
its citizens, the risk that it might seek protected information—or succeed in obtaining
such information—from Applicant is low, if not non-existent.
Examining Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
AG, ¶6.4
A G, ¶ 7(a).5
AG, ¶ 7(e).6
4
pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s contacts with family in Taiwan. Applicant
has resided in North America over two-thirds of his life, and in the U.S. more than half of
his life, including all of his professional life. He has no financial interests in Taiwan. His
contacts with his parents are routine. There is nothing in the circumstances of their
being in Taiwan, or in Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten the risk that he could
be impelled or compelled to provide protected information to Taiwan.
Even if I were to assume that the Government had established security concerns
based on his contacts with his parents, I conclude that he has mitigated the security
concerns.  His contacts in Taiwan are routine, Taiwan generally respects the rights of its7
citizens, and his parents are not, and have not been, involved in activities that would
make it likely that Applicant would have to choose between their interests or those of
the U.S.  I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.8
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
 
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
Indeed, the Government’s administrative notice documents (HE I) focused as much on perceived risks posed7
by the fact that Taiwan is infiltrated with agents from the People’s Republic of Chine (PRC) as on Applicant’s
contacts in Taiwan vis-a-vis the Taiwanese government. Presumably, Applicant would not be able to
distinguish these agents from any other ethnic Chinese on Taiwan. Assuming this is so, the government has
still failed to establish how Applicant might be influenced to provide protected information to the Taiwanese
government—or to the PRC acting under cover.
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶8(a).8
5
