 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03486 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 23, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
was submitted on April 28, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on May 10, 2017. He responded to the Government’s FORM with 
documentation I marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, and admitted in evidence without 
objection. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c, 1.e, and 1.g. to 1.h, and 
denied ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, and 1.i. He is 32 years old, married, and he has one minor child. He 
has been employed by a defense contractor since February 2015. He obtained his high 
school diploma in 2003. He served in the U.S. military from January 2004 to February 
2012, when he was honorably discharged. He was first granted a security clearance 
when he served in the U.S. military.2  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent consumer accounts totaling $25,640. In 
addition to his admissions, credit reports from March 2016 and October 2016 verify the 
delinquent debts. Applicant also listed and discussed them in his security clearance 
application and during his subject interview.3 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to a lack of income. He was a self-
employed carpet technician from July 2000 to January 2004, and he was unemployed 
from February 2012 to April 2013 after he was discharged from the military. He also 
cited to his period of deployment, during which time his wife had a power of attorney 
over their affairs, as a factor that contributed to his delinquent debts.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a is for an automobile account that Applicant cosigned for his wife. It 
became delinquent in 2013 after his wife wrecked the car, the damages were not 
covered by insurance, and his wife did not have the money to pay it. While Applicant 
indicated in his application that he was on a payment plan since January 2015, he 
stopped paying it by his subject interview due to a lack of income. He intended to 
contact the creditor to set up a payment plan when his wife obtained a better job. In his 
response to the FORM, he stated that the debt was paid. He did not provide 
documentation to corroborate his claim.5  
 
                                                          
2 Items 2-4.  
 
3 Items 1-6. 
 
4 Items 2-4. 
 
5 Items 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b is for a credit card Applicant used to purchase a game system before 
he deployed.6 After deployment, he learned that his payments did not go through 
because of an inactive debit card. He disputed the interest charges that accumulated on 
the original purchase and stated that he was willing to pay the debt if the interest 
charges were waived.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is for a charged-off credit card that belonged to his wife, as she was 
given a power of attorney when he deployed. The March 2015 credit report reflects that 
it is an individual account. Applicant intended to resolve the delinquent balance with his 
2016 income tax refund.8 
 
 While he denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f, he stated during his interview that they are 
duplicate accounts for another charged-off credit card that belonged to his wife, which 
he intended to resolve with his 2016 income tax refund. Both credit reports reflect that 
they are individual accounts with different account numbers. In his response to the 
FORM, he provided the confirmation numbers and stated that both debts were paid. His 
evidence was insufficient to show that he resolved these debts.9 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g are for unreturned cable boxes. He stated during his 
interview that he intended to resolve the delinquent balance with his 2016 income tax 
refund. In his response to the SOR, he stated that the accounts were disputed and 
removed from his credit report. SOR ¶ 1.e was reported on his October 2016 credit 
report, and both were reported on his March 2015 credit report. In his response to the 
FORM, he provided the confirmation number and stated that SOR ¶ 1.e was paid. His 
evidence was insufficient to show that he resolved these debts.10  
  
 SOR ¶ 1.h is for the outstanding balance on an internet and television bill at a 
prior residence, because Applicant failed to return the cable boxes. He stated during his 
interview that he paid it in 2016, but stated in his response to the SOR that he disputed 
the debt and it was removed from his credit report. This debt was not reported on the 
October 2016 credit report. He did not provide documentation to corroborate his claim 
that he either paid or disputed it.11 
 
 Applicant was unaware of the medical bill in SOR ¶ 1.i. He intended to research 
and resolve it if he determined it was his debt.12  
                                                          
6 Other than Applicant’s period of military service, the record does not contain information about 
Applicant’s deployment.  
 
7 Items 2, 4. 
 
8 Items 2, 4, 6. 
 
9 Items 2, 4-6; AE A. 
 
10 Items 2, 4-6; AE A. 
 
11 Items 2, 4, 5. 
 
12 Item 2, 4. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
6 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s lack of income and the manner in which his wife handled their affairs 
while he was deployed constitute conditions beyond his control that contributed to his 
delinquent debts. However, he failed to show that he acted responsibly under his 
circumstances. He did not provide documentation to corroborate his claims that he 
either paid, disputed, or otherwise resolved his delinquent debts. His provision of the 
confirmation numbers was insufficient to show that he paid SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 
1.g. There is no evidence that he received financial counseling. As such, there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and 
they continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service.  
 
 
7 
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
