                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
          ----------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  16-00462           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective June 8, 2017, by
Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated December 10,
2016, entitled National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to
hold a sensitive position.   
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2016, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on June 20, 2017, and scheduled for hearing on
August 2, 2017. The Government’s case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5) Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibits. (AE A) The transcript was received on
August 11, 2017.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented filing of his federal
tax returns for tax years 2008-2016 and payment of his SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. For
good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record, and
subsequently was granted an additional 30 days to supplement the record.  Department
Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Applicant did not supplement the record.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file his federal tax returns for
tax years 2008-2012, as required; (b) is indebted to the Federal Government in the
amount of $49,000 for tax years 2008-2012 and 2014; and (c) accumulated six delinquent
consumer debts exceeding $3,000. Allegedly, these tax returns and debts have not been
addressed.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed he filed his federal tax returns for the years in issue. He claimed
he is paying on his owed federal taxes. And he claimed he paid off the consumer debts
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1a-1.f.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old security officer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in November 1991 and divorced April 2004. (GE 1) He has three
children from this marriage. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 35) He remarried in June 2004 and divorced in
April 2009. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 34) Applicant married for the third time in May 2011 and
divorced in 2014. (GE 1-2; Tr. 34) He has no children from this marriage. (GE 1)
Applicant earned a high school diploma in August 1989 but reported no post-high school
education credits. (GEs 1-2) He enlisted in the Army in March 1989 and served seven
years before he received an honorable discharge in March 1996. (GE 1; Tr. 34)
2
Since March 2005, Applicant has worked on a full-time basis for his current
Company A employer. (GE 1; Tr. 36) Contemporaneously with his Company A
employment, he has worked for Company B (since January 2006) in plant protection.
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 35-36) He reported brief unemployment in August 2005 and employment as
a security guard between April 2005 and August 2005. (GE 1)  
Finances
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2008-2012, as
required and currently owes over $49,000 in back taxes to the Federal Government
covering tax years 2008-2012 and 2014. (GEs 1-5)  He attributed his filing lapses to1
insufficient income to cover his taxes owed for these tax years. 
Applicant is currently working with a tax service firm to resolve his tax-filing and tax
debt issues. (AE A; Tr. 41-46) While he assured that he filed his 2008-2012 federal tax
returns at one time, to date he has not provided any confirmation of his filings by himself
or his retained tax service. (Tr. 36-39) Nor has he provided any documented updates of
progress in resolving his tax debts with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). (AE A; Tr. 46-
47) His claims of filing his 2013-2016 federal tax returns, as required, are not
corroborated with any documented proof of his filing any of his alleged unfiled federal tax
returns for the years covered in the SOR, or other years  in issue. (GEs 1-2 and AE A) 
Applicant earns about $60,000 a year from Company A and roughly $30,000 a
year from his second job with Company B. (Tr. 47) He maintains a small monthly
remainder and has a small 401(k) retirement account with his Company A employer with
little assets in the account. (Tr. 48)
 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, Appendix (App.) 4 lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges
in the decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take
into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual
applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
1    Applicant admitted to untimely filing of his 2008-2014 federal tax returns and expressed uncertainty about
whether his 2015 and 2016 federal tax returns were timely filed. (Tr. 39-41) While Applicant committed to
providing filing confirmations for these covered tax years, he failed to provide any post-hearing submissions
documenting his filing of these returns. Although tax years 2013-2016 are not covered in the SOR, unalleged
conduct may be considered (a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is
applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under Directive § 6.3. See ISCR Case No.
03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)(internal citations omitted).
3
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c)  
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor,dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is
4
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during
national security investigative or adjudicating processes  .  . . .  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s non-filing of federal tax returns for
tax years 2008-2012; his incurring of federal tax debts for tax years 2008-2012 and
2014; and his accumulating delinquent consumer debts. Applicant’s filing lapses,
incurring of federal tax delinquencies, and accumulation of delinquent consumer
accounts warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations,” and DC ¶ 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal,
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income
tax as required,” 
5
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also implicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s tax filing failures and accruing of delinquent federal and consumer tax
debts merit no application of any of the potentially available mitigating conditions. His
unresolved tax filing and debt delinquencies prevent him from meeting the Appeal
Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008);  see also ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR
Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s contributions to the defense
industry are worthy of respect. They are not enough, though, to overcome security
concerns associated with his history of failing to file his federal tax returns and address
his delinquent  tax and consumer debts. His delinquent tax returns and tax and
consumer debts remain a source of trust concern. Considering all of the circumstances
surrounding Applicant’s tax filing lapses and unaddressed delinquent debts, unfavorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to listed SOR debts  ¶¶ 1.a-1.h of Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact and the factors listed above, I make the following formal
findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.h:       Against Applicant
                            
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
6
                                        
  
7
8
