 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02872 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). He used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 9, 2015. On 
October 31, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 
AG). 
  
Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The hearing was held on February 28, 2018, I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant also testified. I received the completed transcript (TR) on 
March 19, 2018.1 
 
 On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).2 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.3 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have 
been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old network engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since June 2013, and he requires a security clearance for this employment. He was 
previously granted a DOD clearance in approximately 2013. Applicant is single and has 
no children. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2010.   
 
In his March 9, 2015 SCA, Applicant admitted to using marijuana between 
January 2007 and July 2014 (GE 1 at 31). During an April 5, 2016 interview with a 
Government investigator, Applicant revealed additional marijuana use in July 2015 (GE 
2 at 4). Applicant first used marijuana in 2007, while attending college. He continued to 
use marijuana after he graduated from college and started working at Company A. He 
testified he was unsure if this company had a policy regarding drug use. He used 
marijuana approximately two times while he was employed by Company A. After he 
started working for Company B in June 2013, he was granted a DOD security 
clearance. When he was hired, he was aware Company B had a policy regarding the 
use of drugs.  
 
According to Applicant, his 2014 use occurred at a party where a friend of a 
friend shared marijuana with him. Applicant’s use in July 2015, was at a concert, when 
he took approximately two hits from a stranger’s marijuana joint.4 The use in 2014 and 
2015, occurred while he held an active DOD security clearance, and he testified he 
knew drug use was inconsistent with both his company’s policy and DOD policy.5   
                                                          
1 March 19, 2018 Transcript (TR). 
 
2 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
3 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
4 Applicant told the Government investigator that the 2015 use occurred at a party (GE 2 at 5). 
 
5 TR at 22-27. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified he used marijuana less than ten times in his life, and this use 
was always in social settings.6 On each occasion, he claims his judgment was impaired 
by alcohol consumption. Although he continues to consume alcohol, Applicant promises 
not to use illegal drugs in the future.7 He submitted a signed letter of intent to abstain 
from all drug use (AE A). He never purchased or sold marijuana, nor did he experiment 
with any other drugs. Applicant testified he has “never been a big fan of marijuana” and 
his use was just experimental.8 He claims he regrets his past drug use. 
 
Applicant presented reference letters from his program manager at Company B 
and his program manager at the Government client. He testified he told both individuals 
his security clearance was in jeopardy, but he did not show either man the SOR. A 
week before the hearing, he told his manager at the Government client he used 
marijuana in recent years.9 Applicant also presented a certificate of excellence, a 
certificate of appreciation, and his most recent performance evaluation. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”11 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 TR at 19-20 and GE 3-4. 
 
7 TR at 28-30.  
 
8 TR at 20. 
 
9 TR at 33-35.  
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Egan at 527. 
 
12 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”13 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.14 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”15 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.16 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.17 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.18 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”19 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”20 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
14 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
17 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
20 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, but because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled 
substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic 
term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed 
above. 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal use while granted access to classified information or holding 
a sensitive position.  
 
Applicant admitted he used marijuana between 2007 and July 2015. He used 
marijuana two times after he was granted a DOD security clearance in 2013. The 
evidence raised both disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 
26 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs used; and 
 
6 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; 
AG ¶ 26(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s illegal drug use is not infrequent in 
nature nor has there been a sufficient passage of time. Nor can his use, at least ten 
times between 2007 and 2015, be considered isolated incidents. Applicant’s use of 
illegal drugs did not occur under unusual circumstances, each use occurred in a social 
setting.  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) is not fully established. Applicant has expressed his intent not to use 
drugs in the future. However, his promises to abstain from illegal drug use are undercut 
by his testimony and the record evidence. Applicant continued to use drugs after he was 
granted a DOD clearance in 2013, and after he submitted a SCA in 2015.  
 
Applicant chose to use illegal drugs, and his decision to do so continues to reflect 
negatively on his current security worthiness. Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs, 
especially after being granted a security clearance, cannot be considered a minor lapse 
in judgment, but a pattern of behavior that indicates an unwillingness to follow rules and 
regulations. Security clearance decisions are not limited to conduct during duty hours;21 
off-duty conduct, especially where it reflects poor judgment, provides a rational basis for 
the government to question an applicant’s security worthiness.22 Furthermore, 
Applicant’s eventual self-reporting of his illegal drug use does not change the security 
significance of the underlying conduct. At this time his supervisors are still unaware he 
used marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant engaged in an activity he 
knew to be in direct contravention of federal law and his responsibilities as an individual 
holding a security clearance. His behavior showed a disregard for the law, regulations, 
and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered into with the Government when he 
was granted access to classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
21 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0620 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999). 
 
22 See, e.g., Cole v. Young, 351 U.S. 536, 550 n.13 (1956); Croft v. Department of Air Force, 40 M.S.P.R. 
320, 321 n.1 (1989). 
 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the drug 
involvement concerns raised by his use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
