 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-03889 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                    For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On January 18, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On February 10, 2017, 
Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting four of the six allegations raised and 
requesting a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on May 2, 2017. The matter 
was scheduled for a June 15, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered ten documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as Government exhibits (Exs.) 1-10. Applicant gave testimony, 
introduced one witness, and offered seven documents, accepted without objection as 
Exs. A-G. The Government moved to withdraw the allegation noted as 1.d in the SOR. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG has been again 
amended. The present AG, applied here, is in effect for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Noting no objection, the allegation was withdrawn. The record was left open through 
July 27, 2017, to provide the parties with sufficient time to submit additional materials. In 
the interim, a transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings was received on June 23, 2017. On 
June 27, 2017, Applicant submitted three additional documents. After review by the 
Government, they were admitted without objection as Exs. H-J. The record was closed 
on July 27, 2017. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant mitigated 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old associate with a consulting firm. She has worked for 
her present employer since December 2016, earning an annual salary of about 
$120,000. She started this position after becoming unemployed in November 2015.2 
Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 2006. She has earned both a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. Applicant is single and has never been 
married. She has no children. Applicant has not received financial counseling.  
 
 In the past decade, Applicant has purchased four properties. Each one was 
bought as a new residence. With one exception, each property was retained as a rental 
property as she moved into her next property. (Tr. 44) While she once balanced three 
properties and lived in one, she now only owns one property, her home. She has no 
intention of again buying investment properties.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are the following delinquent accounts, as reflected in 
Applicant’s credit reports: 
 
1.a – Federal tax lien entered against Applicant in September 2015 in the approximate 
amount of $92,401. Collection temporarily suspended. This debt concerns a property 
purchased in 1999 for $125,000, but sold in 2013 for $80,000. (See Tr. 45-47) The 
balance now owed is $93,401, including considerable penalties and interest. (Tr. 47) 
Applicant apprised the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) she had recently become 
unemployed. By letter of June 2016, the IRS informed Applicant that it had temporarily 
closed this collection account due to its determination that Applicant did not have the 
ability to make payments on the debt. (Ex. A) Now employed, Applicant proactively 
contacted the IRS to inform it that she has the funds to make payments on the collection 
account, and is willing to do so. (Tr. 48) She presented a letter from her Certified 
Professional Accountant (CPA), who has helped her since at least 2015, indicating that 
he has contacted the IRS in order to devise a repayment schedule, and made an offer 
to settle the debt. (Ex. A)  
 
1.b – State tax lien entered against Applicant in March 2012 in the approximate amount 
of $ 630. Paid. Initially, Applicant was unaware that this debt was related to a utility 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s unemployment status occurred because her project, which had paid her approximately 
$127,000 a year, had ended, and she could no longer travel for new projects because she was helping 
her sibling, who had entered hospice care. (Tr. 43) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
service that continued to bill her for water after she sold the property. (Tr. 51) This debt 
was paid out of proceeds from the 2015 sale of the property. (Tr. 51, 57-58; Ex. D) 
 
1.c – 180-days past-due in the amount of $56,080 on a real estate mortgage, on which 
a notice of default was filed in May 2015. Satisfied. This debt is related to what became 
an investment property. It was originally purchased in 2003 for $215,000. In about 2009-
2010, a tenant did not pay rent, destroyed the residence, and had to be evicted. 
Applicant tried to restore the home to habitability. Then in about 2010-2011, Applicant 
got very sick, was diagnosed with both Lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, and could not 
work on a full-time basis for a year or so. Therefore, she tried unsuccessfully to return 
the house to the mortgagor. This was at the time she owned three properties 
simultaneously and money was already tight. She withdrew about $50,000 from her 
retirement account in the form of a hardship loan to make payments, but the home was 
ultimately sold through short sale. The mortgage and this past-due sum were satisfied 
from the proceeds. (Tr. 55-56; Ex. B).    
 
1.d – Withdrawn. 
 
1.e – Mortgage foreclosed upon in 2013 – Status unclear. This first mortgage is related 
to a property purchased in 2006 for about $500,000. By the time Applicant tried to sell it 
in 2011, the value on the property had plummeted to about $128,000. (Tr. 60) Her 
attempt to refinance was rebuffed. She also attempted to seek a loan modification or 
conduct a short sale, but without success. (Tr. 61) Despite her obtaining a short sale 
bid, the mortgagor was unmoved. The property went into foreclosure in November 
2011. Therefore, Applicant filed a complaint against the lender to stay the foreclosure 
proceeding. Unsuccessful, the house went into foreclosure, ultimately selling at auction 
for $128,000 in 2013. (Tr. 62)  Applicant received a cancellation notice concerning the 
debt, but has no documentary evidence to substantiate this assertion. (Tr. 63-64) She 
intends to obtain a copy of the documentation previously sent to her. 
 
1.f – Second mortgage on same property as above. Status unclear. This mortgage was 
charged-off. At present, it is unclear what the status is on this account with regard to a 
deficiency balance, if any. (Tr. 63-65) It represents a similar situation as the one 
described in 1.e , above. 
 
 Today, Applicant describes her financial situation as “stable.” (Tr. 65) She had 
about $2,250 in her savings and checking accounts, and a retirement account with a 
balance of approximately $225,000. The 2013 property sale settled all of Applicant’s 
debts and gave her sufficient money to update her home to meet her illness’ demands. 
She has no desire to invest in real estate again. Other than a $15,000 vehicle, she has 
not made any major purchases in the past three years. Her CPA continues to help her 
with regard to her remaining unpaid debt and is actively working on her remaining tax 
issue and mortgage situation. Applicant is presently willing and able to pay off her 
remaining debt through reasonable payment plans or by direct payment with money 
now being saved. She has acquired no new delinquent debts. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. Under the 
Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant had 
acquired two outstanding tax liens, was considerably past-due on a mortgage account, 
and had two loans that were charged-off or in foreclosure related to the same property. 
This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.   
 
Under these facts, four conditions could potentially mitigate the finance-related 
security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
           At least in part, Applicant’s delinquent debt were the result of health issues that 
began to plague her around 2010-2011 and effected her ability to work. Her ability to 
address the debt was further complicated later by her period of unemployment from 
November 2015 to December 2016. In the interim, she tried to work with her 
mortgagors, attempted a short sale, hired a CPA to help with her tax issues, and was 
willing to rid herself of properties she could no longer afford. Given these facts, AG ¶ 
20(b) applies. 
  
At this point, Applicant has approached the IRS about instituting a payment plan 
on the federal tax lien on which the IRS had temporarily suspended collection (1.a); paid 
the balance owed on a state tax lien (1.b); satisfied the past-due amount owed on a 
mortgage (1.c); and is intent on finding paperwork showing that two accounts were 
 
 
 
 
6 
canceled, or institute payments on them if they are still outstanding (1.e-1.f). Given the 
effort thus far shown, I find AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those factors. I 
am also mindful that, under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old associate with a consulting firm. She started working 
there in December 2016, after a little over a year of unemployment. She now earns 
about $120,000 a year in salary. She has maintained a security clearance without 
adverse incident since 2006. She has earned a master’s degree. Single, she has no 
children. She has not received financial counseling.  
 
For about a decade, Applicant moved from one property to another, retaining her 
last residence for rental purposes. At one point, she was balancing payments on three 
properties. Then, in 2010-2011, Applicant was diagnosed with Lupus and rheumatoid 
arthritis, and found it too difficult to work at full capacity. This adversely impacted her 
ability to generate income and make payments related to her properties. For the next 
couple of years, she worked with her mortgagors and banks, often without success on 
such matters as her requests for short sale or mortgage modification. Ultimately, 
however, she satisfied a state tax lien and satisfied a substantial due balance on one of 
her mortgages.  
 
With her new job, Applicant is now able to make payments on a federal tax lien 
the IRS had temporarily suspended, citing to her then-inability to make payments. 
Contact about this plan has been conveyed by her CPA to the IRS and they are 
awaiting feedback from the IRS. Finally, two mortgage accounts on another property are 
seemingly addressed. Applicant believes the debts were cancelled, but she has no 
documentary proof to that effect. It is her aim to find sufficient documentary evidence to 
determine the status of those two debts.  
 
Applicant has the motivation, intention, and financial means to address any 
remaining debts owed. She has the help of her CPA to assist her toward that goal. 
Applicant has acquired no new delinquent debts. She is now more conscientious about 
her finances. She has articulated a reasonable strategy for addressing any balances yet 
to be found unpaid. Given all these considerations, I find Applicant has mitigated 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant  
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
