 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02850 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided sufficient documentary evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The new AGs are effective June 8, 2017, for all 
decisions after that date, and they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the 
SOR.1 Any changes resulting from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my 
decision in this case.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 12, 2017, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 
2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and did not object to 
the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (combined as Item 1) are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 5 are admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. On October 5, 2017, I e-mailed 
the parties and re-opened the record to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional information and documentation. Applicant responded the same day, and again 
on October 18, 2017. He submitted two narrative updates and two reference letters, which 
were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, and admitted without objection. 
On October 19, 2017, having reviewed Applicant’s submissions, I reopened the record 
until October 30, 2017, to allow Applicant additional opportunity to submit relevant 
financial documentation. Applicant indicated that he intended to respond. (HE I-III). I did 
not receive any further materials from Applicant before the record closed on October 30, 
2017. 
 
On November 28, 2017, I issued a decision denying Applicant eligibility for access 
to classified information. Applicant appealed. With his appeal brief, he included an 
October 30, 2017 e-mail to me, as well as a subsequent document from his mortgage 
lender.2  On March 14, 2018, the DOHA Appeal Board found that Applicant had submitted 
materials that I had not received before issuing the prior decision. Accordingly, the Appeal 
Board remanded the case to me to reopen the record and permit Applicant to submit “a 
copy of the attachment actually contained in his email response” of October 30, 2017.3 I 
was to consider that attachment and issue a new decision. 
 
On March 19, 2018, in response to my order, Department Counsel provided a copy 
of Applicant’s October 30, 2017 e-mail to me (which I had not received) and the 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
2 As the Appeal Board noted, the mortgage document Applicant attached to his appeal brief post-dated 
October 30, 2017, though it referenced mortgage payments both before and after that date. ISCR Case No. 
16-02850 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2018). 
 
3 ISCR Case No. 16-02850 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2018). 
 
 
3 
 
 
subsequent mortgage document (which he had attached to his appeal brief). Applicant 
provided a copy of the October 2017 mortgage statement he had originally submitted. I 
marked these documents as AE E, AE F and AE G, and admitted them without objection. 
(HE IV)4 The record closed on March 19, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. I have incorporated 
his admission and subsequent explanations into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. After graduating from high school in 2003, he served 
honorably in the United States Air Force from December 2003 to November 2014. Since 
then, he has been employed in the defense industry. He has held a security clearance 
since 2004. He has worked for his current employer since November 2015. He has never 
married and has no children, but has a fiancée. Applicant has also been attending college 
full-time. (Items 2, 3; AE A, AE B) 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in December 2015, in 
connection with his employment. His background investigation included a January 2016 
credit report and a February 2016 background interview. (Items 2, 3, 4) Applicant’s 
background investigation revealed several delinquent debts, three of which were alleged 
in the SOR.  
 
The largest debt is SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant’s mortgage. Applicant purchased a home 
in May 2014, in his final months in the Air Force. He financed the purchase with a loan 
from the Department of Veterans Affairs. As of January 2016, the mortgage was in 
foreclosure, with $13,165 past due and a total loan balance of $214,514. (Items 1, 3, 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($10,806) is the amount due in collection for an automobile that was 
repossessed. SOR ¶ 1.c ($37) is a small account in collection to a credit union. The 
accounts are all shown as past due on Applicant’s January 2016 credit report. (Item 4).  
 
 Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debts on his SCA, though he discussed 
them in his February 2016 background interview. (Items 2, 3) He explained that he fell 
behind on these debts after leaving the Air Force following a downsizing. As a result, his 
monthly income decreased by about $400. (Item 3 at 4) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the repossession, but denied the 
other two debts. He provided no explanations and no documentation of their current 
status. He provided updated information when I reopened the record, in October 2017. 
He explained that he earned $15,000 less in annual income in the defense industry than 
                                                          
4 Hearing Exhibit IV. Even though it post-dated October 30, 2017, I admitted the January 2018 mortgage 
statement on grounds of equity.  
 
4 
 
 
he had earned in the Air Force. This led him to fall behind on his mortgage, and his car 
was repossessed. He stated that he was advised by friends that he could “rebuild” from 
the repossession but losing his home would be a “detrimental blow.” He explained that 
he and his fiancée successfully renegotiated their mortgage (¶ 1.b) at a better rate, and 
are now current. He believed the small $37 debt (¶ 1.c) was leftover interest from an old 
loan that was repaid years ago. (AE A, AE B)   
 
In Applicant’s October 2017 e-mail, he indicated that he had not banked with the 
creditor for debt ¶ 1.c for many years. He also attached “the most recent statement for 
my mortgage.” He indicated that he was balancing two jobs, going to school and preparing 
for an upcoming deployment for work. (AE E) 
 
Applicant’s October 2017 mortgage statement reflects that to that point in calendar 
year 2017, he had paid $12,928 in mortgage payments. His most recent payment was 
made on October 4, 2017, for $1,284. His next payment was due November 1, 2017, for 
the same amount. No late fees are indicated. (AE F) 
 
Applicant’s January 2018 mortgage document reflects monthly payments of 
$1,284 in August, September and October 2017 (before the record initially closed) and in 
November and December 2017, and January 2018 (after the record initially closed). 
There is also a $ 1,918 county tax payment, in November 2017. The next payment is 
listed as due on February 1, 2018. Applicant had just under $227,000 left on the principal 
balance. (AE G) This is about the same as the previous total balance owed ($214,514) 
combined with the amount previously past due ($13,165). This is likely due to refinancing, 
as he had indicated. The account (¶ 1.a) is now current. (AE F)  
 
Applicant submitted two recommendation letters from current supervisors, both of 
whom attested to his financial stability, the excellence of his work, and the responsible 
performance of his duties safeguarding classified information. (AE A - AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
 As the Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, it is well 
established that no one has a right to a security clearance.5  Further, “the clearly 
consistent standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”6 
 
 The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
                                                          
5 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
 
6 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained 
by known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may 
result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns:  ¶¶ 19(a) “inability 
to satisfy debts” and (c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations” are applicable, 
given the record evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts.  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant documented that his mortgage was current in October 2017, and 
remains so. SOR ¶ 1.b, the largest alleged debt by far, is mitigated. 
 
 The repossession debt remains unresolved. However, Applicant explained that he 
prioritized his past-due mortgage payments, so he and his fiancée would not lose their 
home, rather than resolving his auto debt. This was a reasonable decision, and, 
apparently, the correct one, since they remain in their home. Applicant is not required to 
pay or resolve every debt alleged in the SOR in order to mitigate the security concern 
shown by his finances. He need only establish a reasonable repayment plan, and take 
some concrete steps towards putting it in place. Applicant did that by establishing that his 
mortgage is now current. SOR ¶ 1.c is not a security significant amount, and it is an old 
debt related to a bank account that has long been closed. It is resolved.  
 
 Applicant also established that he fell behind on his mortgage and other debts after 
he lost income in the years after he left the Air Force. This was a circumstance beyond 
his control. Applicant undertook reasonable action to resolve his debts. Applicant met his 
burden of establishing that his debts are being resolved, are under control, or are no 
longer delinquent, as shown by the Government’s evidence. He established that he 
undertook good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) therefore apply.  
 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Applicant provided sufficient documentation that his debts are being 
resolved in a good-faith, responsible manner. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
