                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  16-00479          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel
                     For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his drug involvement and substance
misuse, alcohol consumption, financial considerations, and personal conduct. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On March 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for determining Eligibility for
Access to classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AGs).
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, in accordance with the
guiding principles governing fair process proceedings in Exec. Or. 10865, and subject to
the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the
AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change the decision in
this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 23, 2017, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on September 13, 2017 and interposed no objections to the materials in
the FORM. He did not supplement the FORM.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used heroin between 1980 and at least
August 2014; (b) illegally used xanax between 1980 and at least August 2014; (c) illegally
used oxycontin from 2009-2014; (d) illegally used prescription Valium and Klonopin, not
prescribed to him, in August 2014; (e) received treatment at a substance abuse clinic in
January 2013 for a condition diagnosed as alcohol dependence, sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic dependence, opioid dependence, and poly-substance dependence; and (f)
continued to use alcohol, illegal drugs, and prescription drugs not prescribed to him
following his received treatment in 2013.
Under Guideline G, Applicant allegedly (a) consumed alcohol, at times in excess
and to the point of intoxication since age 12 to at least January 2013; (b) was arrested in
1985 or 1987 for driving under the influence (DUI); (c)  was arrested in 1990 for DUI; and
(d) received treatment in January 2013 for diagnosed alcohol dependence, among
several diagnosed disorders. 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 12 delinquent debts
exceeding $17,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding and unresolved.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his electronic questionnaires for
investigations processing (e-QIP) in March 2015 by omitting his (a) past use of illegal and
prescription drugs not prescribed to him and (b) sought treatment at several hospitals.
Allegedly, Applicant falsified material facts to an authorized investigator of DoD when he
falsely told the investigator in an ensuing interview in January 2016 that he has not
consumed alcohol since 2000
                
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations pertaining to his
alleged drug use, while denying the inclusive dates of use alleged. He admitted the
allegations pertaining to his alleged alcohol consumption (except for the allegations
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d). Applicant admitted the allegations covering his finances
2
and attributed his financial problems to narcotic dependence and child support burdens.
Addressing the falsification allegations, Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his e-QIP ,
claiming he voluntarily admitted all of the material information asked of him by the 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), except for information
about him that covered substance abuse
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old electronic technician for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in October 1992 and divorced in August 1995. He has two adult
children from this marriage. (Items 2-3) He reported no information about his high school
attendance and earned a bachelor’s degree in 2005. (Items 2-3) Applicant reported no
military service. (Items 2-3)
Since March 2015, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Items 2-3) He
reported unemployment between October 2014 and March 2015. (Items 2-3) Previously,
he worked for another defense contractor as a logistics analyst. (Items 2-3)
Applicant’s drug and alcohol history
Between 1980 and August 2014, Applicant engaged in poly-substance abuse with
multiple drugs, some illegal per se (heroin, 1980 to at least August 2014) ), others used
illegally (xanax, 1980 to at least August 2014 and Oxycontin from 2009-2014), and others
not prescribed to him (prescription Valium and Klonopin) in August 2014). (Items 3-6)
Historically, Applicant’s problems with alcohol resulted in two alcohol-related offenses:
DUI arrest and charges in 1985 or 1987 and another DUI arrest and charges in 1990.
Disposition of these charges is unclear. 
Between January 2013 and July 2016, Applicant received treatment at various
substance abuse facilities for diagnosed alcohol dependence, sedative, hypnotic or
anxiolytic dependence, opioid dependence, poly-substance dependence, anxiety
disorder, and depressive disorder. (Items 3-6) Prescribed medications included anti-
anxiety and anti-depression medications. (Items 4-6) His clinical records include
discharge recommendations of follow-up with his primary physician and fair prognoses.
(Items 4-6) Since his discharges from his respective treatment facilities, Applicant has
continued to abuse alcohol and drugs. (Items 3-6) 
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts over a six-year period
between 2010 and 2015. (Items 7-8) Altogether, he accrued 13 delinquent debts
3
exceeding $18,000 that he has not addressed. Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to
his drug dependence condition and child support obligations. (Items 1 and 3) Applicant
has not to date addressed any of his listed delinquent debts. Based on produced credit
reports, Applicant’s listed delinquent debts remain outstanding and unresolved.
E-QIP omissions 
Asked to complete an e-QIP in March 2015, Applicant falsified his security
clearance application in multiple areas. (Items 2-3 and 7-8) He denied using controlled
substances, illegal drugs not prescribed to him, and prescription drugs not prescribed to
him. (Items 2-3 and 7-8) Applicant falsified his e-QIP as well in denying his voluntarily
seeking counseling or treatment as a result of his use of a controlled substance. (Item 2)
Afforded an opportunity in January 2016 to correct and clarify the omissions he
made in his 2015 e-QIP, Applicant declined to so. Asked by the investigator from OPM
about his alcohol consumption, he falsely told the OPM investigator that he had not
consumed alcohol since 2000. (Item 3) And when asked by the same investigator about
his use of heroin, he falsely assured the investigator he had not used heroin since 1985.
(Item 3) 
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG ¶
2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
4
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse
The Concern: The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their intended
purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both
because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations. AG ¶ 24.
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21.
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial
distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of dependence. An individual who is
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . AG ¶ 15.
5
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of poly-substance abuse and
treatment initiatives for poly-substance abuse between 2013 and 2016.  His substance
abuse history includes illegal and non-prescribed prescription drugs and alcohol abuse.
Additional security concerns are raised over his accumulation of delinquent debts over a
period of years and his deliberate omissions and misstatements of material information
concerning his past drug and alcohol abuse and treatment initiatives in his March 2015
e-QIP and ensuing OPM interview. 
Drug concerns
Applicant’s lengthy history of drug involvement and substance misuse is cause for
applying several disqualifying conditions (DCs) covered by the drug involvement and
6
substance misuse guideline. DC ¶¶ 25 (a), any substance misuse,’ and 25(d), “diagnosis
by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of substance use disorder,”
apply to Applicant’s situation.
Based on the compiled record, none of the potentially applicable mitigating
conditions apply.  His history of poly-substance abuse is a recurrent one that Applicant
initiated in 1980 with his use of heroin and Xanax and expanded to include his use of
illegal prescriptions between 2009 and 2014. It is too unclear as to how Applicant’s
treatment initiatives benefitted him to afford him any benefit of the potentially applicable
mitigating conditions covered by Guideline H.
Alcohol concerns
Applicant’s history of poly-substance abuse includes abuse of alcohol. He
incurred two DUI arrests in the 1985-1987 time period with unclear dispositions. His
2013 treatment records for poly-substance abuse include an alcohol dependence
diagnosis. Applicable DCs for alcohol abuse include the following: DC ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern regardless of the
frequency of the individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed
with alcohol use disorder,” and DC 22(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or
mental health professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed
clinical social worker) of alcohol use disorder.”
Without more information from Applicant about his current use of alcohol and to
what extent any continuing alcohol use affects his other raised substance abuse issues,
none of the mitigating conditions potentially available to him are applicable. Alcohol
misuse continues to be a security concern of the Government. 
Financial concerns
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts over a six-year period (2010-2016)
warrant the application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC
¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of
the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s admitted delinquent debts negate the need for any independent proof.
See McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006). Each of Applicant’s admitted
delinquent debts are fully documented and create some judgment issues. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that entitles
him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security clearance
holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence,
7
judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses and debt
delinquencies.  
Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances (i.e., unemployment and child support
issues) are not sufficiently developed to afford him any extenuation benefit of MC ¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, a death, divorce or separation, or clear victimization by predatory practice,
or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  Without
any documented evidence from Applicant that he is addressing his delinquent debts,
none of the remaining mitigating benefits potentially available to him are applicable to the
facts of his case. 
Afforded an opportunity to provide probative evidence of progress in addressing
his debts, Applicant did not provide any post-FORM information concerning his finances.
Financial concerns are not resolved. 
Personal conduct concerns
Additional security concerns are posed by Applicant’s documented omissions of
his covered drug use (both his use of controlled substances and illegal use of
prescription drugs) and voluntary treatment initiatives within the covered seven-year time
period preceding his March 2015 e-QIP submission. His omissions were both knowing
and wilful and covered drug issues material to a security clearance investigation.
Applicant’s imputed falsification of his e-QIP merits the application of DC ¶ 16(a),
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine
national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” 
Applicant compounded security concerns about his level of candor, when he
declined to provide prompt and voluntary corrections of his e-QIP omissions in an
ensuing OPM interview in January 2016. When asked for time lines covering his past
use of heroin and alcohol, Applicant provided false dates of discontinuance of both
substances to the interviewing OPM investigator. His misstatements warrant the
application of DC  ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information; or
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official., competent medical or mental health professional involved
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility determination, or
other official government representative.” Applicant acknowledged his earlier
introductions to excessive alcohol consumption and heroin use only after he was
confronted by the investigator.   
Applicant’s answers to questions posed by the OPM investigator who interviewed
him in January 2016 were neither prompt nor made in good-faith, free of confrontation.
Mitigating conditions are not available to Applicant to absolve him of the lack of candor
he displayed in completing his e-QIP and responding to questions asked of him in his
8
OPM interview about his use of drugs and alcohol. Security concerns raised in
connection with Applicant’s judgment and candor lapses are not mitigated and preclude
favorable conclusions with respect to subparagraphs 4.a through 4.c.
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. He has shown insufficient 
progress to date in addressing the Government’s drug, alcohol, finance, and personal
conduct concerns. Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing his drug and alcohol
issues, his delinquent debts, and his lack of candor demonstrated in his e-QIP and
ensuing OPM interview reflect too little evidence of restored responsibility and
understanding of the risks associated with drug and alcohol abuse relative to his past
abuse of illegal drugs (both controlled substances and illegal use of prescribed drugs). 
Judgment and trustworthiness concerns associated with his lengthy history of
drugs and alcohol abuse and problems with his finances are compounded by his lack of
candor exhibited in his repeated failures to provide prompt and accurate answers to
questions about his past drug and alcohol use in his e-QIP and ensuing OPM interview
to overcome reasonable doubts about his trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect
classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
the drug involvement, alcohol consumption, financial consideration, and personal
conduct guidelines. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and
circumstances of this case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
 GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.g                  Against Applicant
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL INVOLVEMENT)       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a-2.d:                  Against Applicant
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraph 3.a-3.m:                            Against Applicant
9
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):               AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraph 4.a-4.e                            Against Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
  
11
12
