 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01503 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.1 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP) on 
March 16, 2016. On June 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F.2 
 
                                                     
1 Applicant is requesting a trustworthiness determination for access to sensitive information, also known as 
a “public trust” determination, to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position. 
 
2 The DOD CAF acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on August 25, 2017. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 11, 2017, and she 
submitted a response to the FORM (AE A), dated October 11, 2017, including attached 
documents. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 6) and AE A 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old healthcare industry analyst employed by a defense 
contractor since 2015. She was most recently unemployed from September 2014 to April 
2015. She graduated from high school in 1972 and attended college, but did not receive 
a degree. Applicant was married in 1985 and divorced in 1996. She has one adult child. 
 
The SOR alleges various delinquent debts, including federal tax liens entered in 
2011–2013 totaling approximately $195,000. She is also alleged to have small medical, 
phone, and cable television debts, and she failed to file a federal income tax return in 
2012. Applicant admitted the allegations and stated that she will complete her tax filing 
by July 2017; she paid the medical and phone debts; and the cable television creditor 
was unable to locate the alleged debt. Applicant noted in her answer that she was living 
beyond her means and took measures to correct the problem in early 2016 by attempting 
to sell her home. However, because of the federal tax liens on her home, she was unable 
to sell it, and the home was foreclosed. She claimed that $48,000 in “excess funds” from 
the sale of the home were applied to her federal tax debt. She did not provide 
documentary evidence in support of her claims. She stated in her personal subject 
interview that she failed to set aside sufficient funds to pay taxes while she was self-
employed. 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she noted that she has worked in the 
healthcare industry since 1975, and has been trusted with sensitive information and 
always acted responsibly. She admitted to being “remiss” in her income taxes over the 
years, and she has made payments during the past years. She stated her 2012 taxes 
were mailed within the hour of completion. She provided a signature page of her 2012 tax 
return, dated July 10, 2017. She also noted her intent to meet with the IRS on a budget 
and payment plan in November 2017. Finally, she provided a partial credit report that 
shows a $1,286 account by a heating company in a collection status that is not alleged in 
the SOR. No additional documentary evidence of debt resolution and current financial 
status was submitted. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017.3 The revised AG 
apply to this case. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
3 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
The documentary evidence supporting the SOR allegations and Applicant’s 
admissions are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
  Although Applicant was unemployed for about eight months until April 2015, which 
may have contributed to her financial condition, she has not shown sufficient justification 
for failing to file her 2012 income tax return when due, or her failure to pay taxes owed. 
Despite her unemployment, her financial responsibility is questionable. Likewise, she has 
not provided sufficient evidence of efforts to resolve her taxes and other debts, or that her 
financial situation is under control. Applicant is credited for filing the 2012 income tax 
return and the cable television creditor was unable to locate a debt. For the remaining 
allegations, no mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence of resolution of the SOR debts despite 
her attestations to the contrary. I considered the factors that may have led to Applicant’s 
financial difficulties. However, the limited information in the record has not convinced me 
that Applicant has made sufficient efforts to resolve her debts, or that she is financially 
responsible. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
 
6 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
          Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c, and 1.e-1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.g:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access 
to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
