 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02396 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 16, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on September 19, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on September 25, 2017. He did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.1 The Government conceded that 
Applicant paid his delinquent mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.d through the sale of his home in 
January 2014. 
 
  Applicant is 50 years old, married, and he does not have any children. He has 
worked as an engineer for a defense contractor since 1997. He obtained a bachelor’s 
degree in 1990. He served in the U.S. military from 1990 to 1994. He was first granted a 
security clearance in 1998. He previously owned a home from April 2002 to January 
2014, upon which time he has since rented.2  
 
 The SOR alleges a judgment from December 2013 for $20,732, a mortgage 
account for a home foreclosed in January 2014, and four delinquent consumer accounts 
totaling $107,833. A credit report from August 2017 verifies Applicant’s resolution of his 
mortgage account in SOR ¶ 1.e, after foreclosure proceedings commenced on his 
home. Credit reports from November 2016, April 2017, and August 2017 verify the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a and the remaining delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. 
Applicant also listed them in his security clearance application.3 
 
 Applicant attributes the judgment and delinquent debts to the period from 2013 to 
2014 when he attempted to sell his underwater home. He encountered difficulties when 
his lender refused to negotiate short sale terms. He eventually short sold his home in 
January 2014.4 
 
 Applicant indicated in his application that his pay was garnished from July to 
November 2014 to resolve the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. He then stated in his response to 
the SOR that the judgment was dismissed in June 2014. Contrary to his assertions, the 
documentation he provided from the state general district court reflects that there was a 
garnishment proceeding initiated in April 2014 to collect on the judgment, and the 
garnishment proceeding was dismissed due to “no funds.” Applicant has not resolved 
this judgment.5 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Items 2, 3. 
 
5 Items 2, 3.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f are uncollectible 
because they have exceeded the three-year period of statute of limitations. He provided 
a copy of the state code concerning statutes of limitations.6  
 
 Applicant stated that he minimized his family’s expenses and was on a steady 
path to financial recovery. He cited to his work performance as an indication that he 
values his job.7  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
6 Item 2.  
 
7 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s difficulty in short-selling his underwater home from 2013 to January 
2014 constitutes a condition beyond his control that contributed to his delinquent debts. 
However, he failed to show that he acted responsibly under his circumstances. He 
resolved his delinquent mortgage through the eventual short sale of his home in 
January 2014. However, he has not resolved his remaining delinquent debts. AG ¶ 
20(b) only partially applies. 
 
Though he stated that SOR ¶ 1.a was dismissed in June 2014, his 
documentation did not reflect that he resolved this judgment. In addition, he did not 
provide documentation to show that he paid or otherwise resolved his remaining 
delinquent debts. The federal government is entitled to consider the facts and 
circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the 
debt in a timely manner, even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state 
law. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). Moreover, even 
assuming that judicial enforcement of the debt has been precluded by the statute of 
limitations, reliance upon such a remedy is not normally a substitute for good-faith 
efforts to pay off the debt. ISCR Case No. 07-16427 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010). There is 
no evidence that he received financial counseling. At this time, there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s military 
service and his work for a defense contractor since 1997.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d, 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
