 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03195 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct concerns, but failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 5, 2016. 
On October 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on November 7, 2017. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on November 17, 2017. He submitted 
two letters and supporting documents in response to the FORM, marked as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7), 
and the Applicant’s exhibits (AE) marked as AE A and B, are admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on March 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old alarm monitor for a defense contractor since November 
2016. He received an associate’s degree in 2008 and a bachelor’s degree in 2014. Since 
graduating from college, he was unemployed from December 2014 to January 2015 after 
being fired from his job, and from April to November 2016 when he quit to care for his 
fiancée. He has never been married but has lived with his fiancée since May 2014. He 
has a six-year-old child. Applicant has never held a security clearance. 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent federal student loans accounts, totaling about 
$38,554. The SOR also alleges Applicant falsified his 2016 SCA by failing to disclose his 
delinquent student loans. Applicant admits the allegations with explanations. 
 
 Applicant noted that after he graduated from college, the student loans were in a 
forbearance status for some period of time. He struggled to find a job that paid a sufficient 
amount to begin addressing the loans. As time progressed, the loans “faded from 
thought.” He stated that he is current on all other debts and expenses. He noted that when 
he completed his SCA, he answered “no” to the SCA questions about financial 
delinquencies because he believed the accounts were closed and that he owed nothing 
on the student loans based on what he viewed in his credit report. When he was 
interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, he volunteered 
that he had delinquent student loans, and thought the investigator corrected his mistake 
on the SCA on his behalf. 
 
 Applicant entered into a student loan rehabilitation payment authorization on 
October 2017 and agreed to the terms of the agreement on November 8, 2017. The 
agreement requires that he make nine monthly payments of $5 beginning in October 
2017. Applicant has made four $10 payments from October 2017 to January 2018. He 
noted that if he receives a security clearance, he will be able to make larger payments to 
resolve the debts. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
3 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
4 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred over $38,000 in delinquent student loans that remain 
unresolved. The evidence and Applicant’s admissions are sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Appellant attributed his financial problems to lost income and underemployment 
since graduating from college in 2014. Although these may be conditions that resulted in 
 
5 
 
his student loan delinquencies, his periods of unemployment were not beyond his control 
as he was fired from one position, and he quit the other. Regardless, he failed to show 
efforts to adequately address his student loans until after receiving the SOR in this case. 
His periods of unemployment undoubtedly contributed to his ability to pay on his debts, 
but he offered no documentary evidence showing efforts to resolve the issue with the 
creditor or to request additional periods of forbearance until after he received the SOR. 
He did not submit evidence of his current financial status and ability to make required 
payments on his rehabilitation agreement and subsequent required loan payments.  
 
 I am unable to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he 
made good-faith efforts to pay his debts or negotiate good-faith solutions until he received 
the SOR. Applicant exhibited financial irresponsibility that has not been sufficiently 
mitigated. His actions continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable but not conclusive. He has paid only 
$40 toward his delinquent loans to date, and there is no evidence he will be able to 
continue with timely and appropriate payments in the future. I have insufficient evidence 
to determine that he has control over his finances and can meet future financial 
obligations when due. None of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.2 An applicant’s level 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.3 
 
  Appellant did not report his delinquent student loans on his 2016 SCA because he 
believed them to be closed with a zero balance. He denied intentionally falsifying the 
SCAs, and attributed the omission as a mistake that he voluntarily clarified when he spoke 
to the OPM investigator. I find Applicant’s failure to report delinquent debts on his 2016 
SCA as unintentional. AG ¶ 16 is not applicable to SOR ¶ 2.a. The personal conduct 
security concern is concluded for Appellant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s Answer to the SOR and his responses to the FORM. 
Applicant has not shown that he was financially responsible. There is insufficient evidence 
that he has gained control of his finances and can pay future student loan obligations 
when the rehabilitation agreement is converted into a regular payment schedule. I am not 
convinced that he intentionally failed to submit truthful answers on his SCA as noted 
above. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations. Personal conduct security concerns were not 
established.  
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
