 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED COPY )  ISCR Case No. 17-02675 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances 
beyond her control. Notwithstanding, her documentary evidence is insufficient to 
establish a track record of financial responsibility, or that her financial problems are 
resolved or are under control. Financial consideration security concerns are not 
mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 18, 
2015. After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) on August 15, 
2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant 
answered the SOR on August 30, 2015, and requested a decision based on the record 
in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
October 11, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on October 25, 2017. She was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
 
2 
 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM with a one-page 
statement, dated January 5, 2018, and 14 attached documents. Applicant did not raise 
any objections to the proposed FORM evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
February 27, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel submitted as proposed evidence summaries 
of Applicant’s interviews conducted by a government background investigator on 
October 17 and 27, 2016; November 1, 2016; and April 4 and July 7, 2017. (Item 4). 
The summary of the interviews are part of the report of investigation (ROI) prepared to 
document the background investigation.  
 
An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is properly 
authenticated by a witness. (Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20). Here, Item 4 is not 
authenticated in any way. Although Applicant, who is representing herself, has not 
raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua sponte. Applicant’s failure to object 
does not amount to a knowing waiver of her right to object to Item 4 (ROI). The record 
does not support the conclusion that she intended to waive her right to object to the 
ROI. The FORM provided Applicant no information about her right to object to Item 4, or 
about the legal consequences of objecting to it, or failing to object to it. Applicant did not 
make a knowing and informed decision to waive her right to object to an 
unauthenticated ROI. Accordingly, Item 4 is not admissible and I have not considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant did not specifically admit or deny the SOR financial considerations 
allegations. However, in her answer to the SOR, she admitted that the accounts listed in 
the SOR were her and her spouse’s responsibility. Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old personnel security assistant employed with a federal 
contractor. She married in 1999, and she has two children, ages 26 and 14, that depend 
on her for support. Applicant has been working for federal contractors on and off since 
1997. She has held a top-secret clearance for the last eight years. Her current 
employer, a federal contractor, hired Applicant in January 2015. Through the years, 
Applicant had several periods of unemployment due to medical conditions. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial Record) of her 2015 SCA that she 
had financial problems, which included a car repossession and delinquent consumer 
accounts. Applicant explained that she and her husband acquired financial obligations 
when both were working, but were unable to address their financial obligations during 
periods of unemployment.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In about 2011, Applicant’s husband was diagnosed with heart disease, placed on 
disability for a long period, and ultimately had major heart surgery. Applicant has been 
the sole provider for the family since 2012. Her income alone was insufficient to pay for 
the family’s living expenses and their debts, and many accounts became delinquent. 
 
In October 2015, Applicant was diagnosed with breast cancer and underwent 
numerous operations and treatments. Many of the medical expenses were not covered 
by her insurance and she acquired further medical debt that became delinquent. 
Because of her medical condition, she was unable to work full time during extended 
periods and did not have the financial resources to pay her obligations. To complicate 
matters, her husband was also disabled and not working. Applicant anticipated that her 
husband would start working full time again in 2017. She promised to contact her 
creditors, to establish payment agreements, and to start paying her delinquent debts as 
soon as both she and her husband were working again.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant accumulated 20 delinquent accounts totaling 
about $41,560, of which 18 ($13,898) had been placed for collection, and two (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b, totaling $27,662) were charged off. The accounts alleged in the SOR are 
established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in evidence. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f (consumer credit accounts); 1.b (repossessed vehicle); 1.c 
(cable TV); and 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.k (cell phone accounts) are all identified as 
Applicant’s “individual accounts” in the credit reports. SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s 
are all delinquent medical accounts for services provided to Applicant or her family 
members. SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.t are all for unpaid traffic tickets. Applicant 
claimed her husband drove a vehicle that was in her name, but that he was the one who 
incurred the traffic tickets.  
 
In her January 2018 response to the FORM, Applicant included documentation 
showing that in November 2017, she made an agreement to pay $50 monthly between 
November 2017 and October 2018, for a partial payment of $600 on the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She presented no evidence of any payments made pursuant to 
the November 2017 agreement. 
 
Applicant submitted a one-page document showing she successfully disputed 
some medical charges. However, the document does not identify the number of charges 
or accounts resolved in her favor. She also presented a document from a credit union 
showing that the authorized user of a credit card was removed from the account. It is 
not clear who was the “authorized user” and who was the owner of the account.  
 
Applicant settled for less than owed the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, and 
agreed to make six $58 payments between November 2017 and April 2018. She 
presented no evidence of any payments made pursuant to the November 2017 
agreement. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that she made a $100 payment to 
each of the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i; and she made one $25 payment on 
the account alleged in ¶ 1.c, and two $25 payments on two unidentified accounts. She 
 
4 
 
 
also contacted the collection company for the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.k, 
but there is no evidence of any payment agreements established or of any payments 
made. 
 
Applicant claimed she contacted the creditor of the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
and that the creditor refused to provide any information to her because she was not the 
account owner. The July 2017 credit report shows Applicant is disputing the account. 
Applicant stated that the collector for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, no longer has 
that account in collection, and she could not find the legal owner of the account. 
Applicant also alleged that she consolidated all the medical debts into one account and 
that she established a payment plan with the collector. She presented no documentary 
evidence of the consolidation, of any payment agreements established, or of any 
payments made pursuant to the agreement. 
 
Applicant presented no evidence about her current financial situation. She 
presented no documentary evidence of any contacts with creditors, payment 
agreements established, or of any payments made before she received the SOR.   
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.    
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). All available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s inability to satisfy her debts and to meet her financial obligations is 
documented in the record. Between 2011 and 2016, Applicant accumulated the 20 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, all of which total over $41,000. The accounts 
alleged in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports in 
evidence.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the above disqualifying 
 
6 
 
 
conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case, and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are multiple and ongoing. Applicant’s documentary evidence established that her 
financial problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond her control. 
Notwithstanding, her documentary evidence is insufficient to show that she was 
responsible in the acquisition of some of the debts (cell phone accounts), and that she 
was financially responsible in her efforts to resolve, pay, or dispute her accumulated 
delinquent obligations.   
 
 I considered Applicant’s recent efforts to settle, establish payment arrangements, 
and to pay some of her accounts. However, most of her efforts to resolve her financial 
problems were initiated after receipt of the SOR. Moreover, even though she 
established payment agreements, she presented limited documentary evidence of 
payments made pursuant to those agreements.   
 
 The evidence suggests that Applicant may have been overwhelmed by her 
circumstances and was unable to repay the debts. Nevertheless, Applicant failed to 
present evidence of sufficient efforts to resolve her financial problems.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 46, failed to demonstrate financial responsibility. It is well settled that 
once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a 
strong presumption against granting a security clearance. Unmitigated financial 
considerations security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance 
to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
 
8 
 
 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of her past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her 
obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and     Against Applicant 
     1.f-1.t: 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
