1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-01143 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
Applicant did not present sufficient credible information to mitigate financial 
trustworthiness concerns. 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
On December 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for a public trust position to work in 
support of a defense agency. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the 
Office of Personnel Management on January 26, 2016. (Item 6, Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI)). After reviewing the results of the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to grant 
Applicant access to sensitive information.  
 
On June 6, 2017, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for 
financial trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD took the action under DOD 
Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel Security Program (PSP); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 27, 2017, admitting the one allegation of 
delinquent debt, and requested a decision on the record. (Item 2) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on August 22, 2017. (Item 7). Applicant 
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on September 22, 2017, and was 
provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant provided additional information in 
response to the FORM that was received by DOD on September 28, 2017. (Item 8) On 
September 29, 2017, Department Counsel noted that she had no objection to 
consideration of the additional material. (Item 9) I was assigned the case on January 17, 
2018. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 6) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over her objection. She was further advised 
that she could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no 
objection was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she 
waived any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not raise 
any objection to consideration of the PSI when she responded to the FORM. Since 
there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 36 years old. She graduated from high school in 2001, and received her 
professional pharmacy degree in May 2006. She worked for a national pharmacy chain 
as a pharmacist from May 2006 until August 2010, when she started working as a 
pharmacist for the military health care system. She married in May 2007 and has no 
children. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated November 3, 2015)  
 
The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 4, dated June 6, 2017; and Item 5, 
dated December 30, 2015) confirm, Applicant’s one delinquent debt for a charged-off 
mortgage for $377,678. (SOR 1.a) Applicant admits the debt.  
 
Applicant and her husband purchased a house in June 2007. The mortgage 
payments were approximately $2,000 a month. Due to the national housing crisis and 
the recession in her state, the house lost significant value. Applicant indicated that she 
was unsuccessful in her attempts to sell her house or modify her loan because of the 
negative equity and unfavorable loan to value ratio. She provided no timeline, details, or 
documentation to reflect her efforts to sell or otherwise deal with the financial issue with 
the house. Her last payment on the loan was in May 2011. The house and the loan was 
foreclosed in February 2012.  
 
Applicant noted on the e-QIP that the house was foreclosed because its value 
was significantly less than the mortgage because of the circumstances of a housing 
3 
 
market crisis. She was unable to refinance the high interest rate because of the low loan 
to equity ratio. In the PSI, Applicant again noted the significant loss of house value 
because of the national housing market crisis. Applicant believed that the mortgage 
lender attempted to take some collection action. She notes in her response to the 
FORM that the house was eventually sold. She states that the mortgage was a singular 
regrettable one time situation and not continued behavior. She does not believe she is 
responsible for the difference between the amount owed on the mortgage and the 
foreclosed price of the house because her state is a non-recourse state. The record 
indicates that Applicant had sufficient funds to pay the amount of the mortgage due 
each month. Applicant’s e-QIP and PSI show that in 2009, 2010, and 2011, during the 
national housing crisis and recession, she took at least five cruises or vacations 
overseas. 
 
Applicant and her husband purchased a new house with a new mortgage in 
March 2016. Her credit score must have been sufficient for her to qualify for this 
mortgage. The credit reports show that all Applicant’s bills and debts are paid as 
agreed. The only negative on the credit reports is the one mortgage that was 
foreclosed. In her e-QIP, Applicant only lists that mortgage as a delinquent debt. In her 
response to the SOR and her response to the FORM, Applicant notes that all of her 
debts are current and are paid as agreed, and that there is no record of a failure to meet 
financial obligations.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive information] will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There is a trustworthiness concern for a failure or inability to live within one=s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations, because such behavior may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulation, and raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may 
also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligation to protect sensitive 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. (AG ¶ 18). 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant had a house that was foreclosed 
when she failed to make mortgage payments. Her delinquent debt is established by 
credit reports, her admission in the e-QIP, and her response to the SOR. The debt 
poses a trustworthiness concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying 
Conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
 
 There is no indication that Applicant did not have the ability to pay the mortgage. 
Her ability to pay all of her other debts on time and not have delinquent debt indicates 
her ability to pay her mortgage. The record does indicate that she defaulted because of 
the housing market and the house was a losing investment. She made a strategic 
decision to walk away from the loan even though she has the ability to pay the debt.  
5 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant incurred the mortgage 
deliberately and freely. An ongoing unsatisfied debt is considered recent. Applicant’s 
default of her mortgage was willful. Even though Applicant points to the national housing 
crisis and recession in 2008, she does not provide information to show that she could 
not pay the mortgage. In fact, her e-QIP shows that she made overseas tourism trips or 
cruises each year from 2009 to 2011, indicating she had funds available to pay the 
mortgage. She presented no evidence of a good-faith effort to pay the mortgage debt. 
The record contains no corroborating or substantiating documentation of Applicant’s 
efforts to mitigate and resolve her financial problem from the mortgage. The default was 
not the result of poor planning and financial hardship. It was the result of a calculated 
decision about a house that was underwater that showed no sign of recovery. Applicant 
presented no information that she received financial counseling, but indicated that she 
did not require financial counseling because she was able to pay her debts.   
  
 I find that Applicant did not act responsibly and make a good-faith effort to pay 
her mortgage debt. She simple made a decision that it was financially better to walk 
away from the loan than try to pay it. In short, the information provided by Applicant 
does not contain sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant either paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved her mortgage debt. Her debt 
management decision to abandon her mortgage under the circumstances casts doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. The information in the 
case file is sufficient to establish that she did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
  
6 
 
 In a similar case (ISCR Case No. 15-04851, April 28, 2017), the Appeal Board 
determined that in the circumstances of a strategic default of a mortgage, an Applicant 
does not act reasonably and responsibly to resolve debts. In requesting an 
administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. She provided 
insufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding 
her circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial trustworthiness 
concerns. She did not provided adequate credible information regarding her past efforts 
to address her delinquent debt. She did not present a sufficiently credible plan of how 
and when she planned to resolve her mortgage debt. Instead, she stated her intent not 
to pay the debt. Applicant did not establish that she acted reasonably and honestly with 
regard to her financial duties and obligations. Applicant has not mitigated financial 
trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a trustworthiness 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has the ability to pay her 
debts. She has the financial resources to pay and manage her financial obligations 
within her resources. However, she has not established that she can properly manage 
her finances because of the strategic default of her mortgage. Her failure to properly 
manage her finances indicates that she may not properly manage sensitive information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts pertaining to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and her eligibility and suitability for a 
position of trust. For all these reasons, Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
