 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02099 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), J 
(Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct), raised by Applicant’s facilitation of his 
wife’s marijuana use for six years. Security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 4, 2016. On June 26, 
2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines H, J, and E. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.  
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on October 16, 2017. On October 18, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on October 20, 2017, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on 
February 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.d. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. He did not expressly admit or deny the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.a, which cross-allege the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. 
His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old material technician employed by a defense contractor 
since May 1981. His security clearance application indicates that he has never been 
granted a security clearance. (GX 3 at 32.) 
 
 Applicant married in April 1986 and divorced in January 1996. He married his 
current spouse in December 2008. He has three adult children and one stepchild.  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, alleging that he provided his current spouse $100 
per month for marijuana purchases from about December 2010 to December 2016. He 
denied SOR ¶ 1.b, alleging that he intended to continue providing his spouse with money 
for marijuana purchases. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he has not provided 
drug money to his spouse “at all this year, nor will it happen in the future,” because his 
spouse now has a job that requires random drug testing. He also commented that his wife 
is no longer using marijuana because her epilepsy is being controlled by prescribed 
medication. His comment suggests that she was using marijuana to control her epilepsy. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was arrested for possession of marijuana in February 
2012, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He did not admit or deny that he also was charged with 
obstruction without force, as alleged in the SOR. He explained that his wife was involved 
in a car accident, and he was looking for her glasses in the car when he found her 
marijuana and put it in his pocket. The court records reflect that he was convicted of 
marijuana possession (1st offense) and sentenced to 30 days in jail, suspended for 30 
days. (Item 5.) The court records do not reflect that he was charged with obstruction. 
                                                          
1 The FORM includes Item 4, a summary of an interview conducted by a security investigator on March 28, 
2017, and two follow-up telephonic interviews in April 2017, which were included in the report of 
investigation by the Office of Personnel Management. Item 4 was not authenticated as required by Directive 
¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel failed to inform Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy 
of Item 4; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of it on the 
ground that it was not authenticated. Item 4 is not admissible, and I have not considered it. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 Applicant admitted that he was arrested in 1981 for possession of marijuana and 
concealed weapons and pocket knives, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He explained that he did 
not know that putting a lock-blade Buck knife in his pocket or under his shirt was illegal. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 
 4
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Applicant’s admissions establish the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 25(c): “illegal 
possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” He admitted 
possession of marijuana in 1982 and 2012. His facilitation of his wife’s drug abuse for six 
years included possession of her marijuana in the marital home and financing her 
purchases of marijuana, making him an accessory to her illegal conduct.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 5
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(d): satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s drug involvement was recent, frequent, 
and did not occur under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant acknowledged his involvement in his wife’s 
marijuana use, but he took no steps to prevent recurrence. He stopped facilitating her 
drug abuse solely because she stopped smoking marijuana.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant completed a 
drug treatment program for his use of marijuana in 1981 or his drug involvement from 
2010 to 2016. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.” The relevant disqualifying condition, established by Applicant’s admissions 
of marijuana possession in 1981 and 2012, is AG ¶ 31(b): “evidence (including, but not 
limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
 
 6
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. Applicant’s criminal conduct was recent 
and frequent, and it stopped solely because his wife stopped using marijuana. I am not 
satisfied that he will not resume his complicity in her marijuana use if she decides to 
resume it.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .” The following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations;  
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: . . . engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
AG ¶ 16(g): association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 All the above disqualifying conditions are established. Applicant knowingly and 
intentionally facilitated his wife’s illegal drug involvement, raising questions about his 
judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. He knew she was dealing 
 
 7
with illegal drug dealers. He risked damaging his professional reputation and made 
himself vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g): association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s misconduct was serious, recent, 
frequent, and did not occur under unique circumstances making it unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(g) is established. Applicant’s spouse is no longer involved in criminal 
activity. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guidelines H, J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug 
involvement, criminal conduct, and personal conduct.  
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
