 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02294 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 8, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on September 28, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on October 12, 2017. He responded to the Government’s FORM 
with documentation I marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, and admitted in evidence 
without objection. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted in evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d and denied 
1.a. He is 71 years old, married, and he does not have any children. He was 
unemployed as of April 2014, after his prior position as a project manager that he held 
since October 2012 with a consulting company was eliminated. He obtained his high 
school diploma in 1964 and an associate’s degree in 1987. He served in the U.S. 
military from August 1964 to September 1984, when he retired honorably as a disabled 
veteran with a 30% disability rating. He retired from the federal government in May 2006 
after 18 years of public service. He held a security clearance when he served in the 
U.S. military and when he worked for the federal government. He has owned his home 
since 2007.1  
 
 The SOR alleges two judgments totaling $35,020 from 2016 and two consumer 
accounts that were past due for a total of $4,405. In addition to his admissions, credit 
reports from August 2016 and June 2017 verify the judgments and delinquent debts. 
Applicant also listed them in his security clearance application.2 
 
 Applicant attributes his judgments and delinquent debts to his periods of 
unemployment. His first period of unemployment was from May 2006 to August 2006, 
after he retired from the federal government. His second period of unemployment was 
from April 2010 to October 2012, after his prior position as a deputy program manager 
that he held since August 2006 was eliminated after contract completion. Finally, he 
was unemployed as of April 2014, as discussed above. He elected to utilize his 
available funds to pay his mortgage and utility bills.3 
 
 Applicant stated that he was in the process of disputing SOR ¶ 1.a. He provided 
documentation reflecting his disputes for an account with a creditor of the same name 
from 2016 to 2017. Applicant indicated that he had not received a satisfactory response 
to his disputes. He intended to seek legal advice upon obtaining employment. The 
account number he referenced in his disputes was different than that of SOR ¶ 1.a as 
reported in the credit reports.4  
 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3; AE A. 
 
2 Items 1, 3-5; AE A. 
 
3 Items 2-3. 
 
4 Items 2, 4-5; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stated that he communicated with the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.d and explained his situation. He intended to resolve them once he obtained 
employment, by enrolling in a debt relief program that would enable to him to settle and 
resolve his debts.5  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Item 2; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment as discussed above constitute conditions 
beyond his control that contributed to his delinquent debts. However, he failed to show 
that he acted responsibly under his circumstances. He acknowledged that he had not 
received a satisfactory response to his disputes for SOR ¶ 1.a, and he thus intended to 
seek legal advice upon obtaining employment. He did not show that his disputes, which 
referenced an account number different than that of SOR ¶ 1.a, pertained to the same 
account.  
 
In addition, he did not provide documentation to show that he paid or otherwise 
resolved his remaining judgment and delinquent debts. He acknowledged that he 
intended to take action to resolve them once he obtained employment. There is no 
evidence that he received financial counseling. At this time, there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue 
to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military and public service.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
