 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02961 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
03/06/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by 
his past financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record (Answer). 
 
 On November 30, 2017, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant twelve exhibits for admission into the record. Applicant 
submitted  a response to the FORM (Response). The exhibits accompanying the FORM 
                                                          
1 The CAF took this action under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
2 
 
and the documents Applicant submitted with his Answer were admitted into the record.  
On February 23, 2018, I was assigned the case for decision.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 33, is employed as a field engineer for a defense contractor. He 
obtained his high school diploma in 2003. He served in the U.S. Navy on active duty 
from 2009 until he was medically discharged in 2016.  He completed his most recent 
security clearance application in 2016. He has been with his current employer since 
June 2016. He has previously held a security clearance. (Item 5) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has a past-due mortgage account in the amount 
of $54,405, with a total loan balance of $165,093; a collection account in the amount of 
$2,325; and a collection account in the approximate amount of $36. (Item 1) Applicant 
admitted the allegations and provided explanations. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant married in 2008 and separated from his wife in 2016. It was not in the 
record as to the divorce date. As a result of the separation and pending divorce, 
Applicant incurred financial problems. He has a child as a result of his marriage. He is 
now single. During his naval career, Applicant served abroad frequently. In 2013, when 
he was deployed on active duty, a home that he purchased in 2011, lost the tenants. 
The renters moved out without notice, and Applicant could not find other renters. This 
left him in a poor financial situation. (Item 4)    
 
As to SOR 1.a, the mortgage in the amount of $165,093 which became 
delinquent has been resolved. When renters broke a lease in 2013 and Applicant was 
deployed, he could not find new renters. He allowed his elderly, disabled parents to live 
in the home rent free. The last payment on the mortgage was made in August 2013. At 
the same time he consistently worked with the mortgage company to pay various 
amounts, but they would not work with him. He hired an attorney to help resolve the 
issue and the action has been in court. An agreement was reached with the loan holder. 
The case has been fully settled.  Applicant consented to a Final Consent Judgment and 
there is no deficiency for which Applicant is responsible. He attached legal 
documentation to confirm his assertion. (Attachment to Response to FORM)  
 
As to SOR 1.b, a collection account in the amount of $2,325, this debt was the 
result of his ex-wife not paying the house loan. Applicant gave her the money that he 
received from his military move plus extra for expenses. She told him that she would 
take responsibility for the debt. However, she did not and Applicant paid the debt. He 
submitted documentation that the account has been paid in full, and the balance is zero. 
(Attachment to Response to FORM)  
                                                          
2 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD-4), revising the Adjudicative Guidelines. The revised adjudicative guidelines are applicable to all 
security clearance decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (hereinafter “AG”). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) 
(security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
 
As to SOR 1.c, a cable collection account in the amount of $36, Applicant paid 
the debt because his ex-wife did not use the money that he gave her to pay it.  He 
submitted documentation to prove his claim. (Attachment to Response to FORM) 
 
Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation. A letter from the vice 
president of his current company, who retired from the military and held a security 
clearance, recommends Applicant highly. He has worked closely with Applicant for the 
past two years and is familiar with his technical expertise, work ethic, and personality. 
The vice president also knows in detail the financial issues in the SOR and commends 
Applicant for his ability to work calmly with his ex-wife and the creditors.  As Applicant’s 
manager of record, he attests to Applicant’s trustworthiness and his good judgement.  
He also noted that Applicant has a sense of family responsibility and knows that he has 
supported his elderly disabled parents.  
 
 Two letters from co-workers attest to the fact that Applicant is an extremely 
skilled worker and has an excellent work ethic. He is an integral part of the team, and 
plays a key role in work that is accomplished. The co-workers have known Applicant 
since 2016. They also have seen him mentor other employees. Applicant is professional 
in his duties and his tasks are done in a timely manner. Applicant takes pride in his 
work. The co-worker also knows the particulars of Applicant’s financial situation. 
(Attachment to Answer) 
 
Another retired military officer in the company who hired Applicant states that he 
is a gentleman and a patriot.  Applicant is described as one who has forged a reputation 
that is impeccable and above reproach. Applicant has earned the respect of peers and 
management. (Attachment to FORM) 
 
Early credit reports reflect medical collection accounts from years before he 
entered the military and had no insurance. (Items 9,10) The credit reports also reflect 
that Applicant’s accounts are “pays as agreed.”  
 
 As of the submission of the case for decision, the delinquent debts in the SOR 
allegations are resolved. Applicant’s credit reports do not reflect any other delinquent 
accounts. (Item 7) 
 
Law & Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
 
4 
 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges make certain that applicants: (a) receive fair notice of the 
issues, (b) have a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) are not 
subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In deciding a case, a judge must resolve any doubt raised by the 
evidence in favor of the national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Moreover, 
the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he was separated and deployed abroad. 
His home mortgage became delinquent, as well as two other debts. The presence of 
delinquent debt can raise the Guideline F security concern, which is explained at AG ¶ 
18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other 
illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances 
 
5 
 
giving rise to delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and 
other qualities essential to protecting classified information.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following pertinent ones: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, . . . or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems that are alleged in the SOR are the result of 
separation and pending divorce. He admitted to the delinquent debts. Applicant had 
earlier medical debts before he entered the military. He served in the military and was 
medically discharged.    
 
Applicant did not simply walk away from his debts. Instead, he responsibly 
addressed each of his debts. He attempted to work with the mortgage company after 
renters left the home without notice, and he could find no other renters. He was 
deployed at the time. Applicant offered to pay various sums of money but the loan 
company wanted the full amount. He hired a lawyer to resolve the issue. There is no 
deficiency balance and the issue was resolved. The other two debts were the result of 
his ex-wife not being responsible after Applicant provided her with the money to pay the 
marital bills. Applicant paid the bills. He persisted and has resolved all the SOR 
allegations. His current credit report shows accounts that are “pays as agreed.” He 
made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. 
 
The circumstances giving rise to Applicant’s past financial problems do not cast 
doubt on his ability and willingness to continue to properly handle and safeguard 
classified information. Additionally, the manner in which he addressed the debts that he 
incurred following his medical discharge and divorce raises favorable inferences 
regarding his continued suitability. Applicant’s present financial situation does not raise 
a security concern. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, including 
considering the whole-person factors set forth in AG ¶ 2, I find that Applicant met his 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns at issue. 
Furthermore, he established his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Noreen Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
