 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00696 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant resolved all of the statement of reasons allegations. His financial 
problems have been resolved and are under control. The financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated. His evidence is insufficient to mitigate his deliberate 
falsification of his 2015 security clearance application (SCA) wherein he denied his past 
financial problems. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on November 4, 2015. He was interviewed by a 
government investigator on November 10, 2016. After reviewing the information 
gathered during the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
an Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 10, 2017, alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations), and Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant 
answered the SOR on May 11, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on June 13, 2017. The DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 26, 2017, scheduling a hearing for July 12, 2017. At the hearing, the 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified and submitted 
four exhibits (AE) 1 through 4. All exhibits were admitted as evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR financial considerations allegations (¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.l) He denied the personal conduct allegation. (SOR ¶ 2.a) His admissions to 
the SOR allegations and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a thorough review of the record evidence, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor 
while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1987 and completed an associate’s degree in 1990. He received his 
bachelor’s degree in 1993, and earned his master’s degree in 2000. He received his 
doctorate’s degree in February 2011. Applicant married in 1993, separated in 
September 2014, and divorced in March 2016. He has three children, ages 22, 20, and 
16. He had custody of his children after the divorce, and continues to provide support 
for them. 
 
Applicant worked as a welder for a federal contractor between August 2006 and 
June 2015. He attended college during the day and worked as a welder at night. 
Additionally, he has held part-time jobs as a college professor in two colleges, served as 
pastor at a church, and held another part-time job. His current employer, a federal 
contractor, hired him for a full-time position in October 2015. He has been working for 
the same employer and clearance sponsor thereafter. This is his first SCA. 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2015 SCA asked him to disclose 
whether: he was currently delinquent on any federal debt (including financial 
obligations); during the preceding seven years he had defaulted in any type of loan; had 
bills or debts been turned over to collection agencies; had any account or credit card 
been suspended, charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; was he over 120 
days delinquent on any debts; and was he currently 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant answered “No” to all of the above questions. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government background investigator in 
November 2016. When confronted about his financial situation, Applicant told the 
investigator that he opened the student loans between 1987 and 2011. He did not recall 
when the student loans became delinquent, but that they became delinquent due to 
money being tight. Applicant explained he failed to list the delinquent student loans due 
to oversight. (GE 2)  
 
Applicant’s student loans went in repayment status about six months after 
graduation in the 1990s, and then again after his doctorate degree graduation. At 
hearing, Applicant averred he made payments whenever he was able to do so, and he 
took advantage of forbearance and deferments to remain current. (Tr. 29) Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
claimed he could not recall whether the student loans were delinquent between 2011 
and 2015. He explained that it was a challenge to pay his financial obligations because 
he was the family’s sole provider. He recalled several conversations with the student 
loan creditors about modifying his payments because his monthly payments were too 
high, and he could not afford them. 
 
In early 2016, a debt-collection company contacted Applicant with an offer to 
rehabilitate his student loans. (Tr. 32) Applicant set up an income-driven repayment 
plan in February 2016, and paid $5 monthly until February 2017. After a year, all of his 
delinquent student loans were consolidated under one account. He owes about 
$191,000 total for his student loans, and is scheduled to make $247 monthly payments. 
He was late on his first monthly payment, but promised to make timely payments in the 
future. (GE 2) 
 
The investigator confronted Applicant with the medical debt for $627 alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.l. Applicant admitted the debt and explained he underwent surgery in 2013. He 
did not recall when the debt became delinquent, but stated the bill was not paid 
because money was tight. He promised to pay the debt as soon as possible. He paid 
the debt in June 2017. (AE 4, Tr. 22, 24-25) 
 
The November 2015 credit report in evidence shows that at the time of the 
report, Applicant had 10 past-due accounts, 10 additional accounts in collection, and he 
had settled five delinquent accounts. (GE 3) The three 2017 credit reports in evidence 
show Applicant’s student loans were consolidated and are currently in good standing.  
 
Applicant told the investigator, and testified, that his financial situation was 
becoming stable after his 2014 divorce and he was now organizing his budget. His 
financial situation was tight because he was the primary provider for his family. 
Notwithstanding, he bought a new car in 2017, and was considering purchasing a 
home. He noted he did not have much money left over at the end of the month after 
paying his bills and living expenses. Applicant’s yearly income is about $60,000, plus 
some additional income he makes from his part-time jobs.  
 
Applicant repeatedly explained that he did not disclose in his 2015 SCA any of 
the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR because he did not recall the accounts 
being delinquent. He claimed he could not recall when the accounts went into 
repayment status in the 1990s, or after his 2011 graduation. He could not recall when 
his student loans became delinquent, or whether he made any payments. He 
acknowledged that between 2011 and 2016 he received collection notices, but he could 
not recall the specifics of the notices. Applicant also claimed he was not aware that he 
had settled at least five accounts that were in collection as reflected in his 2015 credit 
report. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and 
are applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided 
this case under the current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
 
5 
 
 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. Between 
1990 and 2011, Applicant opened numerous student loans, totaling about $191,000, 
that became delinquent. He also had numerous other delinquent accounts and in 
collection. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying 
conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
6 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant established a student loan repayment plan in 2015. He consolidated 
and rehabilitated his student loans in 2016-2017. As of his hearing, his student loans 
were current, and he had resolved all of the SOR debts. Applicant’s presented some 
evidence to show that his financial problems were caused by, or were aggravated by, 
circumstances beyond his control – low paying jobs, his separation and divorce, and he 
became the sole family provider.  
 
 Applicant still owes a substantial student debt, and he has limited income. The 
credit reports in evidence show Applicant was paying other debts, and settled five 
delinquent accounts after they went into collection. He demonstrated financial 
responsibility under the circumstances by paying those debts he could afford to pay. 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable, he is paying his bills, and he 
participated in financial counseling. Considering the evidence as a whole, his past 
financial problems do not reflect adversely on his ability and willingness to follow rules 
and regulations for safeguarding classified information. Moreover, Applicant has learned 
from the clearance process. He is fully aware that he is required to demonstrate 
financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant omitted relevant and material information from his 2015 SCA when he 
failed to disclose that he had financial problems that included defaulted student loans, 
bills or debts turned over to collection agencies, accounts charged off, he had been over 
120 days delinquent on some debts, and he was currently 120 days or more delinquent 
on some debts. Applicant’s omissions, if deliberate, would trigger the applicability the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. (ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)). Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s 
age, education, work experience, and his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I find 
that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the 
Government. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable. Additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions is required. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns. 
The financial questions in Section 26 of the 2015 SCA are straight forward and easy to 
understand, particularly for a person with a doctorate degree. Applicant’s excuse – that 
he could not recall when the student loans went into repayment, whether he made 
payments, and whether the student loans and other accounts were delinquent - lacks 
credibility. Applicant’s excuses also contradict his prior statements to the investigator in 
2016. The 2015 credit report and Applicant’s 2016 statement establish that he had 
numerous delinquent and in collection debts during the seven years preceding his 2015 
SCA. Applicant provided no logical or reasonable explanation for his failure to disclose 
negative financial information in his 2015 SCA.  
 Applicant failed to disclose his delinquent or in collection accounts even though 
the 2015 SCA questions specifically asked about them. Applicant elected to mislead the 
government about his financial situation and indicated he had no financial problems or 
any delinquent debts. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant deliberately 
falsified his 2015 SCA. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant demonstrated financial responsibility and that his financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. The financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. Nevertheless, he deliberately falsified his 2015 SCA to conceal his past 
financial problems. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l:    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
