 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 17-01378 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
     Statement of the Case 
  
 On January 16, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On June 29, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). (Items 1, 3) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2017. She admitted all of the SOR 
financial allegations under Guideline F. She also admitted the single SOR allegation 
under Guideline E, but she denied that she deliberately falsified the SCA. She 
requested that her case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing.  
 
 On August 27, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on August 31, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that she had 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM 
on September 7, 2017, and she disagreed with the opening statement as well as the 
Government’s argument cited in the FORM. Applicant cited mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines F and E, and argued why these pertained to her situation. In addition, 
Applicant submitted a credit report dated September 7, 2017, and credit reporting 
agency disputes, which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B.  She did not 
object to Items 1 through 6, which I admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 14, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 51 years old. She has 
been employed full time as an acquisition specialist for a Federal contractor since 
December 2015. She had periods of unemployment in between 2006-2015. Most of her 
jobs ended due to being laid off, and other employment ended after she resigned. She 
has never married and does not have any children. She is requesting national security 
eligibility.1  
 
The SOR alleges an unpaid judgment and six delinquent accounts totaling 
approximately $15,000. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g). Applicant stated that her financial problems 
stem from periods of unemployment for about the full year of 2011, and 
underemployment from December 2011 to October 2012. Applicant provided copies of 
her state unemployment benefits she received in 2011. Applicant’s debts became 
delinquent during the approximate 2011-2012 time period. She was employed by a 
Federal contractor for over a year after this time period (10/2012-12/2013). She was 
then unemployed for about two months (12/2013-1/2014), before she was employed by 
a Federal contractor for over a year-and-a-half (1/2014-8/2015). She claimed that she 
had previously contacted all of her creditors to provide them information about her 
unemployment status, but she did not provide any corroborating documentation with her 
Answer. She claimed that after contacting all of her creditors to disclose her 
unemployment status, all of her creditors reported that they would close her accounts. 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not follow up with her creditors to ensure the accounts were closed due to 
the stress she experienced from her financial hardship.2  
 
In May 2017, when she discovered that her interim security clearance had been 
revoked, she was advised to obtain a copy of her credit report. In June 2017, she 
discovered on her current credit report that not one creditor had reported her 
unemployed status or had closed the account, as previously promised. Applicant 
provided evidence of her contact with a credit reporting agency to dispute her accounts 
on June 15, 2017, the same month her SOR was issued. She claimed that once she 
disputed her delinquent accounts by reporting her unemployment status, her credit 
report updated her overdue accounts to reflect “DELINQUENCY DUE TO EXTENDED 
UNEMPLOYMENT.” (Items 1 and 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a. alleges that Applicant falsified her SCA by omitting relevant and 
material information under the financial section. Applicant denied that she intentionally 
falsified information on the SCA based on her belief that her accounts had been 
closed.3 
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant listed that she is currently unable to 
repay the delinquent debts and continue to maintain her current living conditions. She 
denied deliberate falsification to the SCA financial questions based on her mistaken 
belief that the questions asked her to go back five years, and she miscalculated the time 
periods. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
                                                          
2 Item 2. 
3 Items 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has approximately $15,000 of delinquent debt that is unpaid and 
unresolved. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
   
 Applicant stated in her FORM response that she is unable to repay the 
delinquent debts and maintain her current living conditions. She is currently 
experiencing financial hardship. The continuing pattern of her inability to repay her 
creditors, despite being employed full-time since December 2015, and her failure to 
make any effort to repay even the smallest delinquent debt, cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 There is some evidence that Applicant’s financial problems were beyond her 
control, since she was laid off by more than one employer over the years. In order to 
receive the full application of the mitigating condition, however, Applicant must show 
that she acted reasonably under the circumstances. After Applicant’s debts became 
delinquent, she was later employed for long periods of time. There is no evidence that 
she attempted any repayment of any of her debts during the periods of her employment. 
There is insufficient evidence provided by Applicant to show she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances in dealing with her creditors. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors. Applicant’s claim that she incurred debt during a period of 
unemployment or underemployment is not a legitimate reason to dispute her debts. She 
acknowledged the debts as hers, but she does not plan to pay these debts despite 
being fully employed. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d) and (e) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative 
processes. The following will normally result in an unfavorable national 
security eligibility determination, security clearance action, or cancellation 
of further processing for national security eligibility.  
  
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or ward fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The SOR did allege that she failed to report a judgment and her unpaid 
delinquent debts from the last seven years when she completed her SCA in January 
2016. This information was relevant and material for her security clearance 
investigation. She provided conflicting explanations why her omission was not 
intentional. She was aware of her debts and claimed she had miscalculated the dates. 
Applicant’s explanation of using five years instead of the seven-year requirement,  does 
 
7 
 
 
not make sense when every single question begins; “In the past seven (7) years,…” 
Her explanation is not credible, and her omission was deliberate. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
  
 AG ¶¶ 17(a) and (c) set forth below are potentially mitigating conditions that may 
apply to the conduct alleged under Guideline E: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 Applicant stated in her SOR Answer that she did not disclose her delinquent 
debts, or judgment, on the SCA because she had previously contacted her creditors 
who in turn told her they would close the accounts. In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant claimed that she thought she was to go back five years and she made a 
miscalculation. Under either scenario, Applicant did not make prompt, or good-faith 
efforts to correct her omission before being confronted with the facts, and her deliberate 
omission casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) 
and (c) do not apply. 
   
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a position of trust with the Government. An applicant is 
not required to be debt-free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to 
meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy her financial obligations for 
several years due to loss of employment and underemployment. Nonetheless, there is 
no showing by Applicant of any effort to pay, legitimately dispute, or otherwise resolve 
any of the financial security concerns. She has decided it is better to keep her present 
bills current rather than pay past-due bills. These actions are not a good-faith effort to 
resolve indebtedness or pay overdue creditors. While keeping her present debts current 
is commendable, it does not mitigate the security concerns for her indebtedness. 
Applicant has not provided a financial plan to resolve delinquent accounts with her 
creditors. All of her delinquent debts remain unpaid or unaddressed. Applicant failed to 
show that she acted reasonably, with prudence, honesty, and an adherence to a duty or 
obligation by her failure to resolve her debts, and when she deliberately omitted her 
adverse financial information on the SCA.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s good 
judgment, reliability as well as eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Because 
protection of the national interest is the principle focus of these adjudications, any 
unresolved doubts must be resolved against the granting of eligibility to classified 
information.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
