 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03087 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2017, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on November 21, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on November 30, 2017. Applicant responded with an undated two-
page letter, which was received by DOHA on January 12, 2018. The Government 
exhibits identified as Items 1 through 5 included in the FORM are admitted into 
evidence, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
November 1989. He obtained an associate’s degree in 1984 at a community college. He 
reports no military service and he has never been married.1   
 
Applicant disclosed five alcohol–related arrests in the last 35 years, including 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), in section 22 (Police Record) of his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions/Security Clearance Application (SCA) that he signed in 
October 2015. He admitted all of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i of the SOR.2 
Applicant elaborated in his response to SOR ¶ 1.i, that his alcohol consumption since 
he had treatment in late 2013, is limited to a single glass of beer with his meal once a 
week.3 His five alcohol-related arrests and subsequent convictions are confirmed by his 
FBI criminal history print-out.4 The details of each incident are established there and in 
the SOR allegations that Applicant admitted to.  
 
In his April 1, 1999 sworn and subscribed statement, Applicant stated he tried to 
monitor his drinking when he went out to clubs after his 1987 and 1993 DUI arrests.5 He 
became depressed after breaking up with his girlfriend in 1995, and started drinking 
more heavily. When he was arrested for DUI in 1996, Applicant was still on probation 
from his 1993 conviction.6 He was drinking at home most nights of the week.7 He was 
ordered to attend treatment and diagnosed as alcohol dependent. Applicant stopped 
drinking completely following his 1996 DUI conviction. He sought treatment from a 
licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) in May 1997, attending weekly sessions for five 
or six months, and then monthly sessions until October 1998, when his court-ordered 
probation ended.8 He abstained from using alcohol completely from fall 1996 to fall 
1998.9  
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 4.  
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 4. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
In late 1998, Applicant renovated his house by himself. When he completed this 
project, his neighbor invited him over to celebrate. Applicant had his first two beers 
since the fall of 1996. Applicant rejected his LCSW counselor’s conclusions stating “I do 
not believe I am a problem drinker or an alcoholic” in a signed-sworn statement that he 
provided to an investigator in April 1999.10 After his most recent arrest for DUI in spring 
of 2013, Applicant was diagnosed and treated again for alcohol dependence.11 Despite 
his diagnosis, he resumed drinking two to three beers per week, mostly at home.12  
 
In his November 2017 response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he intends to 
marry his long-term girlfriend soon. She has a master’s degree in counseling. Due to 
her positive influence, he stopped drinking and obtained treatment in 2013. He did not 
drink during the six months of treatment, and for roughly two years following treatment. 
At some point, his girlfriend allowed him to have a single drink with dinner, once a week. 
That is why Applicant answered yes to questions about whether he continues to drink. 
He has worked for the same federal contractor for 28 years, and rose to the level of 
grade 4 electrical engineer. In November 2017, he stated that he needs a clearance for 
his occasional access to laboratories a couple of times per year. Applicant stated “ . . . 
seeing my full record in front of me and addressing this and the statement of reasons 
made me realize that with my record, I do not deserve to have even an occasional drink. 
. . . So, I have begun to abstain from drinking alcohol.”13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Item 4. 
 
11 Item 2, and Item 3, at 28. 
 
12 Item 2 and Item 4. 
 
13 Response to FORM, p. 2. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
 
5 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social worker) of 
alcohol use disorder; 
 
 (e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed; and 
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.  
 Applicant has five alcohol-related incidents, including his most recent DUI arrest 
in May 2013, after completing treatment twice. Applicant disclosed these transgressions 
in his SCA and he has admitted them in his Answer to the SOR. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) 
are applicable. He also admitted to receiving treatment in 1997 for a condition 
diagnosed as alcohol dependence-alcohol abuse (SOR ¶ 1.f); and again in 2013. (SOR 
¶ 1.h) AG ¶¶ 22(d), (e ), and 22(f) are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of 
substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
 
6 
 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). See 
also ISCR Case No. 08-04232 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009) (affirming denial of security 
clearance for Applicant with alcohol-related criminal offenses for six years prior to 
hearing). For example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the 
Appeal Board reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That 
Applicant continued to drink even after his second alcohol-related arrest vitiates the 
Judge’s application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 
2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol 
(not to intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued 
alcohol consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary 
and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) 
(involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and 
reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
I have carefully considered the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption and Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption.14 He began consuming 
alcohol, with breaks as long as two years, from 1983 to present. In 1983, 1987, 1993, 
1996, and 2013, he was convicted of DWI. He has been treated twice and diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent. He continues to drink alcohol, albeit moderately.   
 
Several factors weigh against mitigation of alcohol consumption security 
concerns: (1) Applicant’s five alcohol-related driving offenses; (2) his reluctance to 
forswear his alcohol consumption; (3) his binge alcohol consumption to the extent of 
becoming intoxicated repeatedly; (4) his diagnosis with alcohol dependence, 
alcoholism, or alcohol abuse; and (5) his rejection of his counselor’s conclusions. He 
has completed treatment twice, yet he convinced himself it was fine to continue his 
alcohol consumption.  
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related incident was in April 2013. Applicant has 
shown significant improvement in in multiple areas of his life. He has completed 
                                                          
14. The criteria for “alcohol abuse” and “alcohol dependence” are drawn from the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manuals of Mental Disorders (DSM) DSM-IV-TR, which was in effect when the Adjudicative 
Guidelines were issued in 2006. In May 2013, the APA issued the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5).The criteria in DSM-IV-TR for alcohol dependence and in 
DSM-5 for alcohol use disorder (AUD) are objective, well established, and rely primarily on self-reports 
and descriptions. DSM–5 integrates the two DSM–IV disorders, alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence, 
into a single disorder called alcohol use disorder (AUD) with mild, moderate, and severe sub-
classifications. DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 are used throughout the medical and legal communities to 
determine alcohol dependence and AUD severe, which have the same criteria. AUD-moderate overlaps 
with both alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. The alcohol consumption guideline does not 
incorporate DSM remission criteria and leaves mitigation to a case-by-case determination. 
 
 
7 
 
treatments, but has not fully committed himself to a life of sobriety. He has admitted to 
continuing to drink alcohol at least up until October 2017. He has consumed alcohol, at 
times to excess, since approximately age 15 or 16. Given his history of relapses, an 
inference can be drawn that Applicant has not completely confronted his condition, and 
he is not fully coping with his affliction. Applicant has not met his burden in establishing 
that sufficient time has elapsed since his last alcohol-related event, and he has taken 
responsible measures to insure that it never happens again. The above-mentioned 
mitigating conditions do not apply to dispel security concerns about Applicant’s future 
alcohol use. I have lingering doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Alcohol consumption security concerns are not mitigated.   
 
7 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
   
 
8 
 
   
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
