 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01756 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Heintzelman, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his continuing family 
connections in Afghanistan. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On July 24, 2012 and March 21, 2017, Applicant submitted Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 25, 2017, the Department 
of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), for all decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 2, 2017 (Answer), and requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 27, 2017, a 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 12 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on October 6, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the 
Government’s Items. Hence, Items 1 through 12 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. He submitted additional evidence, which was admitted without objection as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2018.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Afghanistan. Those facts are set 
forth in the following: Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Afghanistan, 
marked as Item 12. These documents are included in the record. The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 37 years old, and he was born in Afghanistan. In 2008, he received a 
bachelor’s degree from a university in Turkey. In May 2009, he entered the United States 
and in June 2012, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been married since 2007. 
His wife entered the United States in approximately 2001 and sponsored Applicant’s 
citizenship. Their daughter was born in the United States in 2011. Shortly after he 
emigrated, Applicant started working as a translator and as a role-player.1 Since July 
2012, Applicant has worked for his current employer and he has held a clearance. He 
continues to require a clearance for his position as a cultural advisor.2  
 
 Applicant’s father is a shopkeeper and his mother is a housewife (Items 2 and 3). 
His brother, four of his five sisters, and three of his four brothers-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. None of his family members are employees or affiliated with the 
Afghan government. Since 2012, Applicant has deployed to Afghanistan four times 
supporting U.S. troops.3 He maintains contact with all of his foreign family members, but 
speaks with his parents most frequently. He has not seen any of his family members in 
almost eight years. Finally, over the past nine years, he has sent his parents 
approximately $12,000 (Item 7). 
 
                                            
1 Applicant worked in the U.S. as a translator between April and September 2010. He also worked as a role 
player between January and July 2012 (Item 5). 
 
2 Item 1 and AX A. 
 
3 Applicant deployed to Afghanistan from July 2012 to November 2012; August 2013 to February 2014; 
December 2014 to May 2015; and June 2015 to May 2016 (Item 10). When he was not deployed to 
Afghanistan, he continued to work as a translator, linguist, and role player. 
 
 
 
 
3
 Applicant and his wife purchased a home in the United States two years ago (Item 
4). His wife’s parents are permanent residents of the United States. Additionally, one of 
his five sisters, her husband, and their children are permanent residents of the United 
States. Applicant’s friend is no longer employed by the Afghan military (Item 1 and AX A). 
He is a permanent resident of the U.S. and is married to an American citizen.  
 
 Applicant has worked for the U.S. government for six years, holding a clearance, 
and has not had any security problems or issues. He affirms he would resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the U.S. government (Item 1 and AX A). 
 
  Afghanistan  
 
Afghanistan is a country in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and 
the south.  Iran borders it on the west and Russia in the north.  It is a rugged and 
mountainous country, which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979. After an Accord 
was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued among 
the various ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to 
power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. 
 
 In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, various 
terrorist networks and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Terrorist bombings, tribal rivalry, suicide bombings, and kidnapping and hostage 
takings continue to occur in Afghanistan.  
 
According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue 
to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. There are 
high profile attacks and assassinations against U.S. Coalition and Afghan interests. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is widespread, 
including indiscriminate attacks on civilians by armed insurgent groups. Human 
trafficking, sexual exploitation of women and minor girls and boys continues, and 
prostitution occurs regularly. There are also many reports of rape, torture, and other 
abuses by officials, security forces, detention center authorities, and police (Item 12).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
 
4
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant has ongoing and commendable familial connections with his parents, 
siblings, and their families, who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. These 
relationships create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because terrorists and insurgents in Afghanistan may threaten Applicant and his family, 
as they may seek intelligence or engage in behaviors that are hostile to the United States’ 
interests. Applicant’s relationships with his relatives also create a potential conflict of 
interest between his obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and his 
desire to help family members living in Afghanistan. The evidence and Applicant’s 
admissions are sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
6
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts of this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for nine years and has worked for the U.S. 
government for six years. He stated he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (b) are established based on his past performances, 
his U.S. citizenship, the fact that his daughter, wife, sister and her family, and his wife’s 
family all reside in the U.S., there is no evidence his family members in Afghanistan have 
ever been contacted or pressured by any terrorist group or the Afghan government, and 
there is no evidence he has been a security threat.  
 
Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the 
applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such circumstances give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In this case, Applicant has 
a track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in high-risk 
circumstances in which he made contributions to national security. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 
2008).  
 
 Applicant’s contact with his parents cannot be considered casual or infrequent. His 
contact with his siblings is not casual, but it is also not frequent. AG ¶ 8 (c) is not fully 
established. 
   
 
 
 
 
7
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I considered the potentially disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions in light of all facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The 
Guideline B security concerns do not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, 
but rather circumstances that are normal and commendable results of his family situation. 
There is mitigating evidence weighing in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. 
He is a mature and intelligent person, who has lived in the United States during the past 
nine years, and has been a naturalized citizen since 2012. His spouse and child are U.S. 
citizens. His sister and her family also emigrated from Afghanistan to the United States. 
In his employment, from 2012 to present, he has provided direct support to the U.S. armed 
forces as a linguist, translator, and professional cultural advisor. There is no evidence 
that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family members. Accordingly, 
Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
                                        
         
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
