 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03146 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and it was received by Applicant on 
December 8, 2017. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 8. Applicant did not provide 
a response to the FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. 
The Government’s evidence is admitted. The case was assigned to me on February 13, 
2018.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel gave notice to Applicant that she amended 
the SOR by adding ¶ 1.l, which read:  
 
1.l. You are indebted to the State of Maryland for a tax lien entered 
against you in 2016, in the approximate amount of $34,788. As of the date 
of this Statement of Reasons, the lien remains unpaid. 
 
Department Counsel requested that Applicant respond to the new allegation in 
his FORM response and stated that if Applicant failed to do so that it would be 
considered a denial. Applicant’s failure to respond is considered a denial.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.h. He denied the 
SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i through 1.l. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He married in February 2017. He has adult two children 
from previous relationships. He served in the military from 1984 to 1988 and was 
honorably discharged. He was employed from 1997 through 2014. He was self-
employed from 2014 to 2016. In February 2016, he began working for his present 
employer, a federal contractor.1  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he does not live beyond his 
means nor is he reckless with his finances. He resigned from corporate America, took a 
leap of faith to start his own business, which he put time and money into. He was 
promised funding that did not materialize and has since returned to the workforce.2  
 
 The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions, credit reports 
from April 2016 and August 2017, and official court documents.3 
 
                                                          
1 Items 3 and 8. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Items 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant denied he is responsible for the foreclosure on his house that is alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($9,131) and 1.k, which occurred in approximately 2012. He had an 80% 
mortgage with the lender in SOR ¶ 1.k and a 20% mortgage with the lender in SOR ¶ 
1.j. Applicant stated he did not miss any payments on his mortgage, and there was a 
misunderstanding. He indicated the mortgage company made a mistake with one of his 
payments, which they acknowledged, but never corrected. His insurance was canceled, 
without his approval and the lender in SOR ¶ 1.j doubled his payments and then the 
house was foreclosed. Applicant provided copies of payments he made from December 
2010 to February 2013, and a letter from his attorney to the lender disputing that 
Applicant was in arrears and demanding it rectify the problem. The foreclosure was 
completed. Applicant continues to dispute the debt related to the foreclosure. In June 
2017, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He told the investigator 
that his attorney believed he had a viable lawsuit against the lender for wrongful 
foreclosure and that Applicant intended to sue the lender in the future, but had not yet 
filed suit. Applicant’s documents show he made mortgage payments, but no other 
documents were provided regarding the foreclosure from the lender or Applicant that 
chronicle their actions, substantiate Applicant’s claims, or show the remaining debt has 
been resolved.4  
 
 In his SOR answer, Applicant denied he owed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($3,349), 
1.b ($2,948), and 1.f ($675) that are all with the same creditor. During his February 
2017 interview with a government investigator, he indicated that he was unaware that 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were in collection, and he intended to follow up on the 
accounts by the summer and resolve them. In his SOR answer, he stated that he 
agreed he owed the creditor some money, but the amounts were not correct. He said he 
was working on addressing these debts. Regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f to the same 
creditor, he told the investigator the account was current. In his answer, he indicated he 
was working on addressing this debt. No evidence was provided to show he resolved 
the debts.5  
 
 Applicant admitted he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($2,744). He did not provide 
evidence of action to resolve it.6 He denied the collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d 
($1,780). He indicated he was looking into what the account related to. No other 
information was provided. It is not resolved.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,005) is an unpaid utility bill. Applicant indicated during 
his interview that he would pay it by the summer of 2017. No additional information was 
provided to show he resolve it.8  
                                                          
4 Items 2, 3, and 8. 
 
5 Items 2 and 8. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2 and 8. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($339). He stated in his SOR answer that 
he returned equipment to the creditor. He provided insufficient evidence to substantiate 
his efforts to dispute or resolve the debt with the creditor.9 
 
 In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($205). 
During his background interview, Applicant indicated this debt was erroneous, and it 
was removed from his credit report. No evidence was provided to support Applicant’s 
assertion that he is resolving the debt or that it is current on his credit report.10  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($14,220) and 1.l ($34,788) are state tax liens entered in 2012 and 
2016, respectively. Applicant was confronted during his interview with the 2012 state tax 
lien. He stated this tax lien was released in July 2017. In his SOR answer, he stated this 
tax lien was a mistake and was resolved. He provided copies of his 2009 federal and 
state tax returns. He did not provide documents or proof to show that the 2012 or 2016 
state tax liens were released or resolved.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
9 Item 2. 
 
10 Items 2 and 8. 
 
11 Items 2, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
6 
 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts. He has two outstanding state tax 
liens from 2012 and 2016. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has paid, resolved, or is paying any of 
the delinquent debts. He did not provide evidence that he has made payment 
 
7 
 
 
arrangements to resolve the state tax liens or that they have been released. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(g) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a decision he made to start his own 
business, which subsequently failed. Additional information was not provided. That 
decision was within his control. He stated the 2012 state tax lien is a mistake. There is 
no evidence the tax lien is an error. He also indicated his house was foreclosed due to 
an error by the lender. There is some evidence to support this assertion based on the 
payments he made, but additional substantive information is required. I find that the 
foreclosure may have arisen as a result of issues beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not provide evidence that he has acted responsibly. He 
has not provided sufficient evidence that he has resolved or is resolving his delinquent 
debts or tax liens. There are not clear indications his financial problems are under 
control. There is no evidence he has participated in financial counseling or made good 
faith efforts to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant disputes certain debts, but 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to substantiate the basis of the disputes or evidence 
he is resolving the issues. The mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 20(d) and 
20(e) do not apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He is a veteran. He has delinquent debts and two state 
tax liens that are unresolved. He did not provide sufficient evidence that he is paying or 
resolving his financial issues. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
