 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 17-02620 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for eight tax years. He 
accumulated delinquent taxes for five tax years, totaling approximately $20,716. 
Additionally, he owes six delinquent credit accounts totaling over $41,000. His evidence 
is insufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. The financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 18, 
2015. He was interviewed by a government investigator on December 14, 2015. After 
reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 25, 2017, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on November 6, 2017, and requested a decision based on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
November 28, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on December 13, 2017. He was 
 
2 
 
 
allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM with a one-
page letter, received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on 
January 2, 2018. Applicant raised no objections, and I admitted and considered the 
Government’s proposed evidence. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a through 1.m). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He is a self-employed graphics designer working for a 
federal contractor. He graduated from high school in 1994, and received his associate’s 
degree in 1996. He married in 1997 and divorced in 2005. He has two children, ages 18 
and 17.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2015 SCA that he was employed between 2004 and 
2015. He was laid off for lack of business during two months in 2015. His current 
employer, a federal contractor, hired him in November 2015, and he has been working 
for the same employer since then. This is his first SCA. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his 2015 SCA that he had financial problems in his early 
20s that prevented him from enlisting in the U.S. military. In his response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of his 2015 SCA, he disclosed financial problems related to his 
failure to timely file his federal income tax returns and to pay his taxes. Applicant filed 
his federal income tax returns for tax year 2004 in 2008; for 2006 in 2009; for 2007 in 
2009; for 2008 in 2011; for 2010 in November 2011; for 2011 in June 2012; and for 
2012 in August 2013. No requests for extensions are reflected on the IRS Account 
Transcripts, and late-filing penalties were assessed for both 2011 and 2012. As of 
September 2017, Applicant owed back taxes for tax years 2004 ($9,602); 2007 
($1,698); 2011 ($3,194); 2012 ($1,541); and 2016 ($4,681), totaling approximately 
$20,716. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
Applicant claimed in his 2015 SCA that he forgot to file his federal income tax 
return for 2004 because he was going through a divorce. He mistakenly claimed he filed 
his income tax returns for all other tax years, but failed to pay the taxes owed because 
he did not have the money. He also averred he was making monthly installments to the 
IRS and trying to negotiate an Offer in Compromise for the tax years owed. Additionally, 
Applicant owes six delinquent credit card accounts totaling over $41,000. He stated he 
used the credit cards to supplement his living expenses. He did not have sufficient 
earnings to repay his credit cards. 
 
During his December 2015 interview, Applicant told the investigator that the IRS 
had contacted him concerning his failure to file his 2007 income tax return and to pay 
his taxes. He established a monthly payment plan, but after a couple of months stopped 
 
3 
 
 
making payments because he did not have sufficient income to pay his living expenses, 
child support obligation, and the past-due taxes. Applicant also stated that for the same 
reasons, he failed to pay his 2008 through 2011 back taxes. The IRS filed an $8,024 
lien against Applicant in December 2008 for unpaid taxes. He failed to disclose it in his 
2015 SCA because it was not filed against any property he owned.  
  
In his November 2017 SOR answer, and in his January 2018 response to the 
FORM, Applicant stated that the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e 
were his credit card accounts that he closed. He contacted a credit repair firm to help 
him establish settlement agreements with the creditors, but decided to do it himself and 
avoid their expensive fees. He claimed most of those debts he has been carrying since 
his 2004 divorce, moving the debts from credit card to credit card. He noted he would 
work on settling those accounts in the future. He presented no documentary evidence of 
any contacts with creditors, payments made, settlements or payment plans established, 
or of any disputed accounts. 
 
Concerning his failure to file federal income tax returns, his tax lien, and the 
delinquent taxes alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g through 1.m, Applicant stated he had been 
working with the IRS for the last several years to pay his late taxes. He noted he paid 
two late tax years during 2017 and anticipated paying other late tax years in 2018. 
Applicant explained that he did not timely file for several years because he was 
struggling to make ends meet and it was not until 2012 that he was financially able to 
start addressing his debts. He stated he struggled financially between 2004 and 2012 
because of the debt from his divorce, not being able to find a well-paying job, and 
having to pay child support. 
 
Applicant highlighted as part of his plan to address his delinquent taxes, that the 
tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g would be expiring in 2018. He also believes that the tax 
debts for tax years 2004 and 2007 are uncollectable.  
 
Applicant believes he has a viable four-year plan to address his delinquent debts. 
Once he comes to an agreement with his creditors, he intends to start making payments 
on the principal owed. He then intends to save money to pay his back taxes, and 
because his child support obligation ends in 2018, he intends to apply that money to his 
delinquent debts. Applicant stated he is “not trying to weasel out of what he owes, but 
he is doing what is allowable to make things right, and [he] is living well within his 
means.” He claimed to be keeping his finances well within his budget. 
 
Except for his 2015 statement to the investigator that his “finances were good” 
and all other debts were being paid on time, Applicant presented no evidence about his 
current financial situation. He gave no indication that he had participated in financial 
counseling.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He failed to 
timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2004, and 2006 through 2012. He 
accumulated delinquent taxes for tax years 2004, 2007, 2011, 2012, and 2016, totaling 
approximately $20,716. Additionally, he has six delinquent credit card accounts totaling 
over $41,000. AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . income tax as required.” The 
record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, ,and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are recent and ongoing. Applicant claimed that circumstances beyond his 
control contributed to or aggravated his financial problems - his 2004 divorce, 
subsequent child support obligation, and his inability to find a well-paying job. 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that issues beyond his control 
adversely imparted his financial situation. Even considering for argument purposes, that 
his 2004 divorce, child support, and two months of unemployment in 2015 were 
circumstances beyond his control, Applicant’s scant evidence is insufficient to establish 
that he was financially responsible under the circumstances. Applicant did not show the 
changes in his income over the years in question, and he did not establish he was 
unable to make any payments to address his SOR debts. Lack of income does not 
explain or excuse his failure to timely file his income tax returns. 
 
 Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of a good-faith effort to pay his tax 
debts. I considered that Applicant made some payments to the IRS over the years, but 
those were precipitated by IRS threats of wage garnishments and liens. The tenor of 
Applicant’s statements suggests he has been waiting for the tax lien to expire and for 
the passing of the stature of limitations that would make some of his tax debt 
uncollectable. I specifically considered mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(g), and for the 
above reasons determined that it does not apply. 
 
Applicant neglected his legal obligation to timely file his income tax returns and to 
pay his taxes during extended periods. “Failure to comply with federal and state tax 
laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding to well-established 
Government rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is 
essential for protecting classified information.” ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 15, 2016). This is true even if the returns have been filed. See ISCR Case No. 15-
03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016). 
 
 Applicant’s inability to pay his taxes does not relieve him of his legal 
responsibility to timely file his income tax returns. His repeated failure to file his federal 
income tax returns in a timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good 
judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 27, 2016).  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to show he participated in financial counseling 
or that he is following a budget. There is no documentary evidence of Applicant’s 
current financial situation, including his income, and whether his income is sufficient to 
pay for his living expenses and debts. Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
responsibility. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant, 41, has been employed with a federal contractor since 2015. This is 
his first SCA. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate his financial 
responsibility and his eligibility for a clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied.   
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
