 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant has 
not presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 2) On May 3, 2017, Applicant provided information in 
response to interrogatories sent to him by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On May 3, 2017, Applicant participated in a personal subject interview (PSI) by 
a security investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (Item 3). After 
reviewing the responses to the interrogatory and considering the OPM investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue 
a security clearance. On July 21, 2017, a Statement of Reasons (SOR) was issued to 
Applicant by DOD detailing security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. 
(Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 21, 2017. (Item 1) He admitted the four 
allegations under Guideline B with explanationss. The allegations detailed concerns 
based on family members who are residents and citizens of Algeria. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 5, 2017. (Item 5) 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on October 27, 2017, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. He did not provide any additional 
information in response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on March 9, 2018.  
 
Procedural issues 
 
 Department Counsel requested in the FORM that I take administrative notice of 
relevant facts concerning Algeria. The request and supporting documents are attached 
to the FORM as Item 4. Applicant did not object to the request or the facts. I will take 
administrative notice as requested. The facts concerning Algeria that I administratively 
find are set out below in my decision.  
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 3) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the administrative judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant did not raise any objection to the PSI. Since he did not raise any objection to 
consideration of the PSI, I have considered information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I reviewed the case file and the pleadings, and make the following findings of 
fact. Applicant was born in Algeria in June 1971. He received his bachelor’s degree 
from a university in Algeria in 1993. He immigrated to Canada in 1997 for employment 
and obtained Canadian citizenship and a Canadian passport because he was living and 
working in Canada. He retained his Algerian citizenship to facilitate his travel to Algeria. 
He received a master’s degree from a Canadian university in 2001. He entered the 
United States in 2001 for employment, and he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 
2006. He was not required to renounce either his Algerian or Canadian citizenship, so 
he maintains all three citizenships. He retained his Canadian citizenship because his 
three children were born in Canada and the children have multiple citizenships. He 
retains his Algerian citizenship because of his family connection, his birth in Algeria, and 
to ease his travels to Algeria. Since entering the United States, he has been employed 
by two United States aerospace companies as an aviation engineer. He received a U.S. 
 
3 
 
 
passport and used this passport for his travels except for his travels to Algeria. In 
addition to his U.S. passport, he possesses an expired Canadian passport and an 
Algerian passport. Applicant married in July 2002. He has three children all born in 
Canada but now U.S. citizens. His wife and children have multiple citizenships in 
Algeria, Canada, and the United States. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated December 2, 2015; item 
3, PSI, dated May 3, 2017, at 4) 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that he has a brother (SOR 1.a) and 
sister (SOR 1.b) who are citizens and residents of Algeria; a brother who is a citizen of 
Algeria and Canada but resides in Algeria (SOR 1.c); a mother-in-law who is a citizen 
and resident of Algeria (SOR 1.d); and that he owns land in Algeria valued at $95,000. 
(SOR 1.e) (Item1) 
 
 In the PSI, Applicant told the security investigator that he obtained a U.S. 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen for travel purposes. He has used the passport 
since then each time he traveled outside the U.S. He obtained the Canadian passport 
when he applied for and received Canadian passports for his children. The Canadian 
passport expired in October 2013. He has never used the Canadian passport and does 
not plan to renew it. He obtained his latest Algerian passport in December 2014, and it 
does not expire until December 2024. He uses it to travel to Algeria. He plans to renew 
the passport when it expires. 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Algeria, but is now a U.S. citizen. She does not work 
outside of the home. His mother is an Algerian citizen who is a resident alien in the 
United States. His mother is not employed outside her home. His father is deceased. 
His mother-in-law is a housewife and a citizen and resident of Algeria. She visited 
Applicant and his wife in the United States in 2009. He sees his mother-in-law when he 
visits Algeria. He talks to her infrequently when she calls his wife. His father-in-law is 
deceased. 
 
 Applicant has a sister and brother who are both citizens and residents of Algeria. 
He has another brother who is a resident of Algeria but has dual Algerian and Canadian 
citizenship. He talks to his siblings in Algeria periodically by phone and sees them 
annually when he visits Algeria. He has another brother who is a resident of Canada 
and a dual citizen of Canada and Algeria. Applicant has quarterly contact with this 
brother in person or by telephone. He has a sister who is a housewife and a citizen and 
resident of the United States. (Item 3, PSI at 6) 
 
 Applicant told the security investigator in the PSI that he purchased a vacant lot 
in Algeria in October 2011 with plans to build a small house on the property for 
retirement purposes. He is the sole owner of the property and had the financial ability to 
purchase it. The property is not important to his overall financial situation. (Item 3, PSI 
at 6) 
 Algeria is a multiparty republic with a president as head of government elected by 
the people for no more than two five-year terms. The U.S. established diplomatic 
relations with Algeria in 1962, but Algeria severed relations with the United States in 
 
4 
 
 
1967 during the Arab-Israeli war. Diplomatic relations were reestablished in 1974, and 
Algeria is now a strategically located and capable partner with the United States. Algeria 
and the United States exercise strong diplomatic, law enforcement, and security 
cooperation.  
 
 Even though the terrorist situation in Algeria has improved markedly, it continues 
to pose a threat to safely and security for U.S. citizens. Al-Qaeda has used suicide 
attacks again people, buildings, and facilities. There were 62 such attacks in 2015, and 
at least 36 terrorist attacks in 2016. The U.S. State Department has warned of a 
potentially high risk of terrorism and kidnappings against U.S. citizens.  
 
 The most significant human rights violations are restrictions on the freedom of 
assembly and association, lack of judicial independence and impartiality, and limits on 
freedom of the press. There is also excessive use of force and torture by police, 
widespread corruption, societal discrimination, and violence against women. The U.S. 
State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to Algeria and the need to 
avoid overland travel in Algeria. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create circumstances in 
which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interest or otherwise made 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interests is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Because of the threat of terrorism, violence, and human rights abuse in Algeria, 
Applicant’s family members in Algeria are a security concern, raising the following 
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Applicant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
 
6 
 
 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family member must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States.  
 
 The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has contact with his siblings and his mother-in-law who are residents 
and citizens of Algeria. Applicant’s relatives in Algeria have a heightened risk of 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion on Applicant because of 
the threat of terrorism and human rights violations in Algeria.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for or 
obligation to immediate family members. Applicant has contact with his family members 
in Algeria by phone and yearly visits. This level of contact is not casual or infrequent, 
and indicates that Applicant’s sense of loyalty to the family members is high rather than 
minimal. His purchase of land in Algeria with intent to build a house on the land to use in 
retirement is further evidence that his connection to his siblings in Algeria is not casual.  
 
7 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s family members in Algeria can place him in a position to have to 
choose between the interest of the relatives and the interests of the United States. He 
has not presented sufficient information to establish that his connection and loyalty to 
the United States is so deep and longstanding that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of United States interests. He has closer and deeper ties to 
Algeria. He was born in Algeria, and he visits Algeria yearly. He has phone contact with 
his siblings and mother–in-law in Algeria and sees them when he visits Algeria. He 
owns property in Algeria with plans to build a house to use in retirement. He left Algeria 
for better employment opportunities and settled in Canada before moving to the United 
States. All of his education was in Algeria, except for a master’s degree he received in 
Canada. He stayed in Canada about four years, and his children were born there. He 
and his immediate family members maintain dual citizenship with Canada. He saw an 
opportunity for better employment so he came to the United States in 2001. He became 
a U.S. citizen in 2006. He and his immediate family now have citizenship in three 
counties, Algeria, Canada, and the United States. He travels on a U.S. passport except 
for his trips to Algeria. He has not established and has not met his heavy burden to 
show that his relationships with his family members in Algeria are not a security 
concern. I conclude Appellant has not mitigated security concerns for foreign influence.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that the presence of 
Applicant’s family members in Algeria creates a heightened risk of foreign influence 
leading to the potential for vulnerability, pressure, or coercion on Applicant.  
 
The whole-person concept requires consideration of all available information 
about Applicant to reach a determination concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
 
8 
 
 
classified information. I considered that Applicant immigrated to the United States for 
better employment and he and his family became U.S. citizens as soon as they could. 
However, Applicant did not present sufficient information to establish that his connection 
and loyalty to the United States is so deep and longstanding that he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of United States interests. His connections to 
Algeria increases the probability that Applicant will not recognize, resist, or report any 
attempts by a foreign person or entity to coerce or exploit him. These facts leave me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated foreign 
influence concerns based on his family members in Algeria. Access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
