 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00688 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 28, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On March 17, 2015, Applicant submitted Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). (Government Exhibit 3.)  On April 26, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 16, 2017.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
June 14, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, was 
received by Applicant on July 10, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM on 
August 16, 2017, and submitted Exhibits A through L which were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on November 9, 2017.  Applicant had no 
objection to Government’s items.  Therefore, Items 1 through 7 are admitted into 
evidence, and hereinafter referenced as Government Exhibits 1 through 7.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Manager.  
He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
  
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2004.  He has held 
his current security clearance off and on since about 2000.   
 
The SOR identified fourteen allegations under this guideline consisting of 
Applicant’s consumer delinquent debt totaling approximately $24,236, and his back tax 
debt to the Federal Government and state in the amount of approximately $52,000.  In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations, and provides some 
explanations.     
 
 Evidence in the record shows that over the years, Applicant has lived beyond his 
means, always putting his family’s needs and wants first, and always being supportive 
of his children’s dreams.  Among these things, sending his son to private school in 
2012, and purchasing a vehicle for his daughter at about the same time was costly.  
 
3 
 
(Government Exhibit 7.)  Applicant began falling behind on his mortgage in 2013 and 
has not been current since then.  Applicant’s states that his delinquent taxes were 
caused by poor planning and not properly withholding sufficient taxes for several years, 
in an attempt to pay for his lifestyle, which is beyond his means.  Applicant also 
indicates that in July 2013, his wife was impacted with a reduction in force by her 
employer which resulted in significant loss of income for the family.  He states that since 
August 2015, his wife started new employment and they were on a path of financial 
recovery when they had to completely exhaust their savings due to an incident where 
mold was found in their home that needed remediation.  Applicant has not always made 
the right choice in determining how to spend his money, and as a result fell far behind 
on many of his debts.   
 
 Applicant became indebted to the following creditors set forth in the SOR: 
 
a..  Applicant is indebted to a bank for an account past due in the approximate amount 
of $6,301, with an total outstanding balance of $450,109.  Applicant explained that this 
debt was for home repairs after mold was found behind his kitchen counter not covered 
by his home owners insurance.   Applicant states that he appealed the denial of the 
claim and lost. The debt remains outstanding.   
    
b. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $7,595.  Applicant states that on May 15, 2017, he set up an 
installment payment plan of $163 monthly and that the correct amount owed is $4,297.  
The account remains owing. 
 
c. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $6,879.  Applicant rejected a settlement offer of $2,063.  
Applicant states that on May 15, 2017, he set up a payment arrangement for monthly 
installments of $200.  The account remains owing. 
 
d. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,016.  Applicant states that he made payment arrangements 
and issued two electronic checks in the amount of $381 totaling $762.  He contends that 
the account will be paid in full on June 2, 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit G shows the debt 
has been paid. 
 
e. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $956.  Applicant states that on May 15, 2017, Applicant made 
payment arrangements, and that balance was $406.70.  He states that he issued one 
electronic check in the amount of $406.70.    He contends that the account will be paid 
in full on May 18, 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit G is correspondence from the creditor, and 
shows that the debt is being resolved.    
 
f. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $630.  Applicant states that he incurred the debt in May 2014, 
and that the balance on the account was $384.  He states that he paid the debt in full on 
 
4 
 
February 2, 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit G show correspondence from the creditor, and 
that the debt has been settled.   
 
g. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $315.  Applicant states that on May 15, 2017, Applicant 
contacted the creditor and paid the bill in full on May 16, 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit G 
shows correspondence from the creditor, and that the balance has been paid. 
 
h. Applicant is indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $544.  Applicant states that he made payment arrangements 
and issued two electronic checks in the amount of $175, totaling $350.  He contends 
that the debt was to be paid in full on June 2, 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit G shows 
correspondence from the creditor, and that the balance has been paid. 
 
i. Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in the amount of 
$20,036 for tax year 2012.  Applicant states that the balance is $14.097.59, and that he 
is following an installment agreement paying $350 monthly since approximately 
September 2012.  Applicant’s Exhibit H is an installment agreement summary from the 
IRS that does not reflect payments.         
 
j. Applicant is indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes in the amount of 
$18,894 for tax year 2013. Applicant states that he is following an installment 
agreement paying $350 monthly since approximately September 2012.  Applicant states 
that he contacted the IRS on May 15, 2017 and was told that he owes a balance of 
$19,139.94 for back taxes for tax year 2011.  Applicant’s Exhibit H is an installment 
agreement summary from the IRS that does not reflect payments.   
 
k. Applicant is indebted to the state for delinquent taxes in the approximate amount of 
$4,000 for tax year 2012.  Applicant states that since 2012, he was enrolled in 
automatic deductions (legal garnishment) to have $200 withdrawn from his account 
every pay period to pay this debt.  He contends that the debt was paid in full in 2012.  
Applicant’s Exhibit I is garnishment record showing payment in full.     
 
l. In about 2014, the state franchise tax board entered a tax levy against the Applicant in 
the approximate amount of $5,785.14.  Applicant states that since 2014, he was 
enrolled in automatic deductions (legal garnishment) to have $200 withdrawn from his 
account every pay period to pay this debt.  He contends that the debt was paid in full in 
2014.  There is nothing in the record to address this debt.   
 
m. In about 2016, the state taxation authority entered a tax levy against the Applicant in 
the approximate amount of $2,722.74.  Applicant states that since 2016, Applicant was 
enrolled in automatic deductions (legal garnishment) to have $200 withdrawn from his 
account every pay period to pay this debt.  He contends that the debt was paid in full in 
2016.  Applicant’s Exhibit I is garnishment record showing payment in full. 
 
n. In about 2017, the state franchise taxation authority entered a tax levy against the 
Applicant in the approximate amount of $643.79.  Applicant states that since 2017, he 
 
5 
 
was enrolled in automatic deductions (legal garnishment) to have $200 withdrawn from 
his account every pay period to pay this debt.  He contends that the debt was paid in full 
in March 2017.  Applicant’s Exhibit I is garnishment record showing payment in full.  
 
 Since the issuance of the SOR, Applicant states that he has taken significant 
steps to address his debts.  In May 2017, Applicant contacted a credit counseling firm to 
assist him in resolving his debt and establishing a budget.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K.)  
Applicant states that he is being helped in negotiating resolutions with his debtors which 
has helped him to get control of his finances.  In summary, he contends that after the 
issuance of the SOR, he addressed approximately $17,000 of his debt detailed in 
allegation 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., 1.g., and 1h. of the SOR.  He states that he is now on a 
payment plan to pay his back taxes.  Applicant states that he has now paid off his state 
back taxes but his Federal back taxes remain significant.  He states that he currently 
owes about $15,000 in Federal back taxes.      
 
 Performance Evaluations of the Applicant from 2011 through 2016 indicate that 
on the job he has consistently either met expectations, exceeded expectations, or been 
a model leader in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)   
 
 Letters of recommendation from wife, friends, mother-in-law, friends, peers, 
spiritual leaders and other professional associates of the Applicant attest to his sense of 
reliability and trustworthiness.  They consider him to be law abiding, kind generous, 
loyal and committed to his work.   (Applicant’s Exhibit L.)   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
 
6 
 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant’s history of excessive indebtedness shows unreliability, 
untrustworthiness and poor judgment.  Applicant’s actions demonstrate that he has 
consistently spent beyond his means for many years, and show both a history of and an 
inability or a unwillingness to satisfy his debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations are 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  Admittedly, Applicant has made some headway in resolving his debts.  However, 
to allow them to become this excessive does not demonstrate good judgment.  To 
scurry at the last minute to resolve his excessive indebtedness does not show a pattern 
of responsibility.  In fact, it shows that he is normally irresponsible with his finances.  
Applicant has paid several of his delinquent debts and has attempted to resolve some of 
his tax debt. However, he still remains significantly indebted to the Federal Government.  
Furthermore, although some of his financial problems may have been aggravated by 
circumstances beyond his control, namely his wife’s loss of income, there is no 
evidence to show that he adjusted his spending to account for that situation.  At this 
 
8 
 
point, it cannot be assumed that all the debts have been resolved or that he has 
achieved financial stability.  Given the volume of debt presented, under the particular 
facts presented, there is insufficient evidence that he has acted reasonably and 
responsibly.  His actions clearly demonstrate unreliability, untrustworthiness, and poor 
judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
