 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00219 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 2, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 13, 2017, in accordance with the Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raised security concerns under Guidelines B and C.1 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
government, DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
August 14, 2017, scheduling the hearing for September 27, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection (Tr. 16, 54.), and Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 for Administrative 
Notice. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. Applicant 
presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through V, all of which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 12, 2017. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to the Republic of Turkey (Turkey). Department Counsel provided 
a five-page summary of the facts, supported by seven Government documents, 
identified as HE 1. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s request. Hence, I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the Government administrative notice request. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute and are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., and 2.a. He denied SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c, and 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for two years. He holds a master’s degree from a U.S. university. (GE 1; 
GE 2; AE C; AE L; Tr. 56.)  
 
 Applicant was born in Turkey and immigrated to the United States in 2003. He 
was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2011. He has been married to his wife for six years. 
They met in the United States, and she is a naturalized U.S. citizen. They have one 
daughter, who was born in the United States and is a U.S. citizen. He has raised his 
daughter as an American and she only speaks English. Applicant’s sister-in-law and 
brother-in-law are also a U.S. citizens. (GE 1; GE 2; AE B; Tr. 32-35, 57-58.) Applicant 
and his wife have visited Turkey four times since their marriage. On their visits, they 
avoid eastern Turkey, which has been involved in political turmoil and insurgent 
uprisings. (Tr. 41-44.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife own real estate in the United States valued at 
approximately one and a half million dollars. (AE F; Tr. 29.) It consists of a home and 
two rental properties. (AE F; Tr. 60-63.) They have over 1 million dollars in savings and 
retirement accounts. They own no property or any other assets in Turkey. (AE P; AE Q; 
Tr. 29.) Applicant testified: 
 
[E]verything we have and also the emotional bonds that we have are -- 
everything is in the United States. We don't have any bonds or any 
properties, any assets in Turkey. My wife and I are proud to be American 
 
3 
 
citizens and we are preparing our child's future here in the United States. 
I'm thankful for living and working in the United States because this 
country has provided a lot for me and for my family. Thus, I have 
undivided loyalty to the United States. I recognize the privileges and, more 
importantly, the liabilities of having secret clearance. Throughout my life, I 
have never had issues with the law. I have always had great 
achievements in my career. There is nothing in my mind that would impact 
my principles, make me disloyal to the United States. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s friends, coworkers, and manager wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf. 
They describe Applicant as a high performing and dependable employee. He is known 
as thoughtful, discrete, loyal, fair, honest, and trustworthy. (AE A.) He has received 
monetary awards for his excellent performance. (AE N.) His performance appraisals 
reflect that he successfully completes his goals. (AE N.) He holds two patents for 
innovations he created. (AE I.) He is also active in his community and supports the local 
YMCA program. (AE J.) 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of Turkey. They reside in 
both the United States and Turkey, traveling frequently between the two nations. His 
mother is 67 years old and his father is 71 years old. His father is retired from a private 
company. His mother is a retired teacher. Both parents get a small pension from the 
Turkish government. Applicant communicates with his mother once or twice a week and 
his father once or twice per month. Neither are affiliated with the Government or military 
in Turkey. Applicant’s father travels to Turkey for health care treatments and stays 
approximately three months on those trips. Applicant’s father has a tourist visa to visit 
the United States, and his mother is a permanent resident green card holder. Applicant 
testified that his father will be applying for a green card within the next year. (GE 2; Tr. 
24-25, 38-40, 63-69, 74.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of Turkey. She is 39 years old and is a 
homemaker. Her husband owns a private textile company. Applicant communicates with 
his sister once or twice per year. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 26, 69.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens of Turkey. They 
permanently reside in the United States as green card holders, and have no plans to 
return to Turkey. They own no property in Turkey. They intend to become U.S. citizens 
as soon as they are eligible. His mother-in-law resides near-by, with his sister-in-law. 
His father-in-law resides out of state with his brother-in-law. Applicant communicates 
with them once or twice per year. Applicant’s wife frequently communicates with her 
mother by phone or through internet calls. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 27-28, 36-39, 46-48.) 
  
Guideline C – Foreign Preference   
 
 After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2011, Applicant exercised his 
Turkish citizenship by voting in Turkish elections in June 2015. He did so because he 
 
4 
 
believed that Turkey was leaning in a political direction that was contrary to U.S. 
democratic principles and interests. It was a “one-time act,” as Applicant had never 
voted in a Turkish election before. (Tr. 31, 72-73.) They wanted to support free speech 
and freedom of belief. (Tr. 44.) He and his wife have no plans to vote in future Turkish 
elections. (Tr. 31, 73.) They now only vote in U.S. elections. (Tr. 45.)  
 
 Applicant surrendered his expired Turkish passport to his facility security officer. 
(AE G.) He promised that he would not obtain another foreign passport. (AE D; Tr. 74-
75.) Applicant is also willing to surrender his Turkish citizenship. He has not completed 
his compulsory military service in Turkey and he has no intent to do so. He believes that 
if he does not complete that service before he turns 40, he automatically forfeits his 
Turkish citizenship. (Tr. 75-76.) He has registered with the selective service system in 
the United States. (AE H.) 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding the Republic of 
Turkey. Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system and a 
president. (HE 1 at enclosure 6.) President Obama noted Turkey is a “strong NATO ally, 
a critical member of the coalition against ISIL.” (HE 1 at enclosure 5.) However, there 
have been violent terrorist attacks in Turkey, and the possibility of terrorist attacks 
against U.S. citizens remains high. The U.S. State Department has issued a travel 
warning advising citizens to avoid traveling to southeast Turkey due to the persistent 
threat of terrorism. A 2016 coup attempt led Turkish authorities to declare a state of 
emergency and permitted suspension of due process protections. It also permitted 
security forces to detain individuals without charge. Further, significant human rights 
problems exist. (HE 1; AE T; AE U; AE V.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
5 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
  Applicant has ongoing and commendable familial connections with his parents, 
parents-in-law, and sister who are citizens of Turkey. His sister resides in Turkey and 
his parents reside in both Turkey and the United States. Further, his wife is close to her 
parents. While his parents and sister do not live in southeastern Turkey, which is an 
area where terrorism and violence are prevalent, there is still a potential heightened risk 
associated with these family members relating to those threats and the human rights 
abuses pervasive in Turkey. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
 
7 
 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
It is unlikely that Applicant’s relationship with his parents, parents-in-law, or sister 
would cause him to be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of 
a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the United 
States. His sister and parents do not reside in southeastern Turkey, where the risks of 
terrorism are high. His parents-in-law are permanent residents of the United States. 
Further, Applicant expressed deep longstanding ties to his chosen country, the United 
States. All of Applicant’s assets are located in the United States and he does not plan to 
return to Turkey. He and his wife are active in their community and are proud to be 
raising their daughter as a U.S. citizen. They have extended family in the United States. 
Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interests. The above two conditions fully apply. 
 
Guideline C: Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in any way that conflicts with 
U.S. national security interests. 
 
  Applicant voted in a Turkish election in 2015. However, he did not take that 
action in an attempt to serve the Turkish government’s interests, but rather to promote 
the U.S. national security interests. The evidence is insufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying condition, or any security concerns under this guideline. 
 
 
8 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. Two are applicable: 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign citizenship 
that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests. 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern. 
 
 Applicant has surrendered his expired Turkish passport to his FSO. He has no 
intention of obtaining another Turkish passport or of voting in a Turkish election again. 
He is willing to renounce his Turkish citizenship and has not completed the required 
compulsory military service needed to retain it. Further, his vote in the Turkish election 
did not present a national security concern. Any potential concern under this guideline 
has been mitigated by the evidence. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Applicant has the unqualified 
support of those who know him and have observed his work performance. Furthermore, 
he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States due to 
his longstanding emotional and financial ties here. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence 
and Foreign Preference security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
