 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-01849 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not produce sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by the Government’s adverse information about his use of alcohol. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 30, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 
On June 23, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption).2 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without a 
hearing. On August 23, 2017, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2017, and had 30 days from the date of 
receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to submit 
additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant did not submit any additional 
information and the record closed on October 8, 2017. I received this case on January 
16, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel proffered summaries of subject interviews of Applicant 
conducted by government investigators on November 29, 2016, December 16, 2016, 
and December 19, 2016. (FORM, Item 4) In the FORM, Department Counsel did not 
advise Applicant of his options under paragraph E3.1.20 of the Directive. Paragraph 
E3.1.20 governs admission of documents such as Item 4 and requires witness 
authentication as a prerequisite of admissibility. Applicant did not object to the 
admissibility of Item 4. Absent notice to Applicant of his options regarding this particular 
document, I find his apparent waiver of objection to the admissibility of Item 4 was not a 
knowing and fully-informed decision. Accordingly, I have not considered Item 4 in 
reaching my decision in this case.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that in June 2000, Applicant was 
charged and convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) (SOR 1.a); that in November 
2001, he was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), evading a 
peace officer, and driving without a license (SOR 1.b); and that in 2003, Applicant was 
charged with DUI, for which he was convicted in 2004 and placed on five years of 
probation after four days in jail (SOR 1.c). The SOR further alleged that in January 2005 
(SOR 1.d) and July 2006 (SOR 1.e), while Applicant was on probation, he was charged 
with DUI and probation violation. In July 2008, again while still on probation, he was 
charged with DUI and later convicted of the lesser included offense of reckless driving 
(SOR 1.f). In September 2015, Applicant was charged and later convicted of DUI, 
sentenced to two days in jail, and placed on probation for one year (SOR 1.g). (FORM, 
Item 1) 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. Adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines issued by the Director of 
National Intelligence (DNI) on December 10, 2016, and made effective for all security clearance 
adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 5). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed his most recent DUI arrest and explained he 
was sentenced as a first-time offender in the state where the arrest occurred. Law 
enforcement records obtained by investigators during Applicant’s background 
investigation documented all of the arrests listed in the SOR. Further, Applicant has 
admitted SOR 1.a – 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied SOR 1.e. (FORM, Items 2, 3, and 5) 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since June 2016. Employment with his current employer and several others 
since 2005 has involved work in support of overseas military programs. Between July 
1974 and February 1997, Applicant served in three different military branches in both 
active duty and reserve capacities. He and his wife have been married since 2010. 
Applicant did not submit any information regarding his past or current use of alcohol; nor 
did he document any alcohol-related counseling or treatment. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Available information about Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests since 2000 
reasonably raises a security concern under Guideline G, expressed at AG ¶ 21: 
 
  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The facts established by Applicant’s e-QIP disclosures, his admissions to the 
SOR, and law enforcement records produced by the Government require application of 
the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 22(a): 
 
alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder. 
 
By contrast, in response to the Government’s information, Applicant did not 
provide information that supports application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 
23. The security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). There is no information in the 
record that would resolve any of the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for clearance 
                                                 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
raised by the Government’s information. Because protection of the national interest is 
the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved 
against the individual. 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
