 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01495 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 29, 2015. 
On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new 
AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s initial Answer to the SOR, on June 13, 2017, was incomplete. He 
submitted a complete Answer on July 11, 2017. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2017. On November 
17, 2017, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for December 5, 2017. 
The hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but offered 
no documents into evidence. The record closed on the date of the hearing. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on December 12, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He has been married since 2004. He was previously 
married from 1989 to 1990. He has 23-year-old twins. He has been employed as a truck 
driver for a federal contractor since January 2015. (Tr. 33-34; GE 1)   
 
Applicant was arrested in January 1995 and charged with two felony counts of 
abuse, neglect and endangerment of a child. (SOR ¶ 1.a) His children were removed 
from the home. He admitted he was arrested for these charges, but he was only 
convicted of a gross misdemeanor and required to complete parenting classes and 18 
months of probation. His six-month-old twins were hospitalized. (Tr. 31, 36, 38-41, 61-
64) 
 
Applicant was also arrested in April 2004 (¶ 1.c) and charged with felony battery 
with a deadly weapon and malicious destruction of property.  Applicant was involved in 
a physical altercation with another driver, who was stopped at a red light.  According to 
the police report, Applicant struck both the other vehicle, and the other driver, with a tire 
iron. Applicant initially lied to the detectives and denied any involvement. He testified 
that he was required to turn himself into the police station. He was angered by what he 
perceived to be reckless driving by the other driver. He admitted that he punched the 
other driver with his fists, but he denied damaging the other vehicle or using a tire iron 
during the confrontation. He was found guilty of a lesser felony, required to pay 
restitution and complete three years of probation. (Tr. 44-48, 65-67; GE 3, GE 5, GE 6) 
  
 Applicant was arrested in November 2011 for driving under the influence. (¶ 1.g) 
He admitted that he tested positive for amphetamines after the arrest. However, he 
denied knowingly ingesting them. He possessed a DOD security clearance at the time 
of his arrest. He believes he tested positive for amphetamines due to secondhand 
smoke. He admitted he must have unknowingly come in contact with amphetamines. He 
initially claimed that he had last used amphetamines more than 20 years ago. However, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
3 
 
 
he later testified that he never used amphetamines in his life. (Tr. 11-12, 51-52, 56-57, 
69; GE 3, GE 5) 
 
Applicant has a history of employment terminations. He was terminated for cause 
in March 2004, April 2006, June 2008, July 2009 and January 2015. (¶¶ 1.b, 1.d-1.f, and 
1.h) The SOR also alleged that he intentionally failed to disclose all of these 
employment terminations on his January 2015 SCA, as required. (¶¶ 1.i-1.m) In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted his intent to falsify by failing to disclose this adverse 
information. He listed that he wanted to make a good impression by leaving the 
negative information off of the application. He testified that he deliberately withholds 
adverse information about his employment history whenever he fills out any type of 
application, either employment or security clearance application. It was not until his 
background interview, approximately seven months later, that Applicant disclosed his 
job terminations to the DOD authorized investigator. Applicant listed in his Answer that 
in his background interview it should be noted that he was 100 percent honest and that 
he can be trusted.  (Tr. 31, 69-71; GE 1, GE 3)  
 
Policies 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
4 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information or sensitive information. Of special interest is 
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during 
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
5 
 
 
 
     (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; and 
 
     (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
Applicant has been terminated numerous times between 2004 and 2015. He has 
several felony arrests.  AG ¶¶ 16(d) (2) and (3) apply. He deliberately failed to disclose 
any of his employment terminations on his 2015 SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that he deliberately failed to disclose his employment 
terminations on his 2015 SCA because he was ashamed of his work history and he 
wanted to make a good impression. This is not a mitigating circumstance. There is no 
indication that he made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the falsified information on 
the security application, despite that he signed and certified that all of his listed 
information was accurate and true. Applicant did not disclose his employment 
terminations until his background interview approximately seven months after he 
completed the SCA.  AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.   
 
 Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to disclose his job terminations not 
only his most recent SCA, but on his prior one as well. Falsifications on his 2010 SCA 
are not alleged in the SOR, but I can consider them in weighing mitigation and likelihood 
of recurrence. He believes that by revealing the truth when asked about it later 
somehow shows that he is reliable and trustworthy after all. I do not find that to be the 
case. Applicant did not establish that his deliberate omissions are unlikely to recur. They 
continue to cast doubt on his judgment, trustworthiness and reliability. AG ¶ 17(c) does 
not apply. There is insufficient evidence to raise AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Overall, Applicant’s work track record, criminal history and his repeated 
falsifications raise continuing questions about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
