 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00881 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2017, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 14, 2017. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-7 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
 
2 
 
 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on October 
5, 2017. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections nor did he submit 
any exhibits. Items 3-7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on February 23, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted some of the allegations and denied others in his answer to the 
SOR. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 2014. He 
was unemployed from January 2014 to March 2014, and from April 2012 to December 
2012. He served in the Marine Corps from 1980 to 1989 in both an active duty and 
reserve status. He is married and has two adult children. He has a Ph.D.1  
  
 The SOR alleged six delinquent debts totaling approximately $44,166 and a 
dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. One debt is a past-due mortgage loan. Two are 
charged-off student loan accounts. Two are charged-off credit card accounts and one is 
a delinquent medical account.2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer he claimed the mortgage debt was settled through a short 
sale. The debt remains on Applicant’s most recent credit report. He provided no 
documentation supporting a short-sale transaction. This debt remains unresolved. 
Concerning the student loan debt, Applicant claims it is his son’s debt, but he cosigned 
the loan and is responsible since his son defaulted. He provided a document showing a 
collection firm contacted Applicant’s wife offering to set up a payment plan for some of 
the student loan debt. There is no documentary evidence showing Applicant (or his 
wife) accepted the offer and started making payments. The student loan debts are 
unresolved. Applicant claimed that the two credit card debts were resolved during the 
short sale of his residence. He failed to provide documentation supporting his assertion. 
These debts are unresolved. He denied the medical debt, but failed to provide 
documentation establishing his dispute of the debt. This debt is unresolved. Applicant 
filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in January 2014. That petition was dismissed in 
February 2014 for failing to file and distribute a Chapter 13 payment plan.3 
 
 Applicant provided letters of recommendation from a friend, a work supervisor, 
and project a manger. They consider Applicant trustworthy, honest, loyal, and 
possessing good judgment. Applicant also documented his receipt of unemployment 
                                                          
1 Items 3-4. 
 
2 Items 1-2, 5-7. 
 
3 Items 2, 5-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
benefits in 2013. He did not provide any information about his current financial situation 
or a budget. There is no evidence of financial counseling.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
4 Item 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved because of his 
inability to pay them. His Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed for failure to file a 
payment plan. I find both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Although Applicant experienced periods of unemployment that were beyond his 
control, he failed to take responsible actions to address his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies. Aside from the offer to settle some student loan accounts, Applicant failed to 
provide documentation showing any efforts to agree to the settlement and begin making 
payments. He failed to provide documentation showing the resolution of his mortgage 
debt and credit card debts through a short-sale transaction. He failed to provide 
documentation supporting his dispute of the listed medical debt. There is no evidence of 
financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his military service and 
his civilian employment, but I also considered his lack of progress in resolving his debts. 
Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance because of his financial 
status. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
