 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02297 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on April 17, 2017. (Item 3, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to 
issue a security clearance.  
 
On September 6, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
alleging delinquent debts of security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
2 
 
 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 2, 2017, admitted two and denied five 
allegations of delinquent debt with explanation. She requested a decision based on the 
written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on October 31, 2017. (Item 6) Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on November 9, 2017. She was provided the opportunity to file objections and 
to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 9, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not 
be considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, 
the administrative judge could determine that she waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM so she did not 
raise any objection to the PSI. Since she did not raise any objection to consideration of 
the PSI, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 39 years old. She graduated from high school in May 2007, and attended 
technical school receiving a certificate in October 2014. Applicant has been employed 
as a technician for a defense contractor since February 2016. Prior to that employment, 
Applicant held various jobs since she moved with her military husband or left for a better 
position. She worked as an office manager, a human resource manager, or accounts 
manager. She reported unemployment from May to September 2007, and March to May 
2015. She first married in July 1997 and divorced in January 2008. She married her 
present husband in April 2008. She has two biological and three step-children. (Item 2, 
e-QIP, dated May 19, 2016; Item 3, PSI, dated April 17, 2017)  
 
 The SOR alleges and credit reports (Item 4, dated June 28, 2016; Item 5, dated 
June 12, 2017) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a student loan in 
collection for $22,703 (SOR 1.a); a loan past due for $7,754 on a balance of $8,423 
(SOR 1.b); a utility bill charged off for $421 (SOR 1.c); another utility debt in collection 
for $360 (SOR 1.d); a utility bill for $125 charged off for the same utility company listed 
in SOR 1.c (SOR 1.e); a delinquent medical debt of $30 (SOR 1.f); and a television 
service debt in collection for $541 (SOR 1.g) The total amount of the delinquent debt is 
approximately $32,000. The majority of the debt is the student loan at SOR 1.a.  
 
3 
 
 
 In her e-QIP, Applicant attributes most of her debt to her and her husband being 
laid off at the same time, and her missing work because of surgery. She reported that 
she is trying to establish payment plans. In the PSI, Applicant notes that she could not 
recall the specifics of the student loan. However, she could not afford the payments and 
fell behind on the debt. She indicated she would make payment arrangement with the 
creditor. Applicant did not provide information to verify any contacts with the creditor or 
payment arrangements.  
 
 The personal loan at SOR 1.b was to repair a pool damaged in a storm. 
Applicant could not make the payments after she and her husband were laid on the 
same day. In the e-QIP, Applicant noted that in May 2016, she entered a new payment 
plan starting of $189 a month. In her response to the SOR, Applicant provided a 
document to verify the payment plan and establish that the payments are current. The 
debt is resolved.  
 
 Applicant reported that she did not recall the specifics of the utility debts at SOR 
1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. She indicated that she could not afford to pay the bills and fell behind 
on payments. She would contact the creditors and make payment arrangements. In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant reported that she has no record of service from either 
utility company. She and her husband lived in military housing for some time and did not 
have a utility bill. She did not provide information on contacts with the creditors, 
attempts to enter payment plans, or payment of the debts.  
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant noted that she was paying the medical 
debt that day. She did not provide any information or documents to reflect that she paid 
the debt. As for the debt for televisions cable service, Applicant noted that the debt was 
generated by a service box that had not been returned. Applicant indicated she returned 
the box. However, she did not provide any information to show contact with the 
television service company concerning the return of the box or payment of the debt.  
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that she needed to provide documents to 
verify her payment of any debts or contact with creditors. Applicant provided documents 
and information on only one debt to show payment of her debts or plans to resolve the 
debts.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) An 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or 
careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving responsibly 
or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave 
in other aspects of life.  
 
5 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports confirm the SOR delinquent 
debts. This information is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts, and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay debts shows an inability and history of not meeting her 
financial obligations. Once the Government has established adverse financial issues, 
the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. I considered the 
information and documents Applicant provided as mitigation in response to the SOR 
and FORM. The available evidence presented by Applicant does not show that she has 
resolved or is resolving almost all of her delinquent debts. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. The information in the case file shows 
that Applicant has been gainfully employed since November 2004, except for two short 
periods of unemployment. Regular employment for almost 14 years appears to provide 
her the income and ability to pay her financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant did not provide information on her present finances or salary. She 
claimed that she would contact her creditors to establish payment plans. Except for one 
creditor, she did not present information on contacts with creditors or efforts to establish 
payment plans. Her lack of action results in her debts being numerous, ongoing, and 
recent. Her debts were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. 
Applicant presented no evidence that she received financial counseling.  
 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. Applicant is not required to be debt-free. 
All that is required is that Applicant act responsibly given her financial circumstances. 
Applicant must establish that she has a reasonable plan to resolve financial problems, 
and that she has taken significant action to implement that plan. Applicant’s plan must 
show a systematic method of handling debts, and meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments. A promise to pay delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track 
record of paying debts in a timely manner and acting in a financially responsible 
manner. Except for one debt, Applicant did not present evidence of debt payments.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient details about what she plans to do to address 
the debts alleged in the SOR. She did not provide documentation to show proof of 
payments, correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact, 
copies of debt disputes, evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, or other 
evidence of debt resolution. There is insufficient evidence to establish why Applicant 
was unable to make greater progress resolving her debts. There is insufficient 
assurance that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. Her lack of reasonable and responsible actions towards her finances 
is a strong indication that she will not protect and safeguard classified information. 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to establish that she took or plans to take reasonable 
and responsible action to resolve most of her financial obligations. Applicant did not 
demonstrate appropriate management of her finances and did not show a record of 
action to resolve financial issues. In requesting an administrative determination, 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In doing so, she must sufficiently 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her finances, 
adequately articulate her actions and positions, and provide facts to mitigate the 
security concerns. In short, the file as a whole does not contain sufficient information to 
mitigate financial security concerns. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not established her 
suitability for access to classified information. I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
