 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00804 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 8, 2016. 
On April 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 Applicant responded to the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on October 
13, 2017, and the hearing was convened on November 15, 2017. Government Exhibits 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
(GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified. The record was held open 
so that Applicant could submit additional evidence. He submitted additional documents 
marked together as AE A, and they were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 22, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old security officer employed by a defense contractor since 
2010. He graduated from high school in 2004, and attended some college. He married in 
October 2016 and has two children; five and seven years old. He served in the Army from 
2005 to 2010, and was honorably discharged. He previously held a security clearance 
while in the Army. In March 2015, Applicant was temporarily suspended without pay from 
employment pending resolution of a criminal charge for assault on a family member. The 
charge was dismissed and he returned to work in October 2015. 
 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling over $24,000. Applicant admits 
the SOR debts. Two debts, totaling about $14,000, involve vehicles that were 
repossessed in 2014 because payments were stopped. After Applicant was discharged 
from the Army, he purchased two vehicles with loans. One vehicle was purchased for a 
friend with Applicant as a co-signer on the loan. The friend defaulted on the loan, and 
Applicant did not assume responsibility for the payments. Applicant purchased the other 
vehicle for himself, but defaulted on the loan after the vehicle had mechanical trouble. 
One creditor filed suit against Applicant to recover the debt. That lawsuit is currently 
pending. Other delinquent debts resulted from a broken apartment lease while he was 
unemployed, an unpaid telephone account, a defaulted payday loan, and a student loan. 
Applicant claimed that debts listed as SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h were paid after he 
returned to work in October 2015, but he did not provide documentary evidence to support 
his contention. 
 
Applicant testified that he consulted a debt relief company from 2015 to 2017. It is 
unclear what, if anything, was resolved through that process. On November 17, 2017, two 
days after his DOHA hearing, Applicant entered into a debt negotiation agreement with 
another debt relief company that included some of the SOR debts. He submitted the 
contract in his post-hearing submission, but he did not submit evidence of payments or 
other resolution efforts for any of the SOR debts. 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
3 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
5 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts may have been incurred under circumstances that 
were beyond his control, however, he has not shown sufficient evidence of payments of 
debts that he claimed were resolved, or of progress toward resolution of the remaining 
debts. Despite an opportunity to provide additional documentary evidence after the 
hearing, Applicant failed to provide records of payments on debts or progress made with 
his first debt resolution company. Although he may have paid some debts, and made 
payments under a debt relief plan, I am unable to verify the amount and regularity of such 
payments. I am not convinced that Applicant has control of his finances and that 
delinquencies are unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility that dates back to at least 2010. 
Despite relatively steady employment, he did not responsibly address his delinquent 
debts in a good faith or timely manner. He obtained financial advice from a debt relief 
company, but did not show progress in management of his debts. He has now hired a 
new debt relief company, but has not shown a track record of debt resolution. There is 
insufficient evidence of debt resolution or financial responsibility that makes a similar 
situation unlikely to recur in the future. No mitigating condition fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant has not shown that he is now financially stable and able to adequately 
address his past financial delinquencies in a timely manner. Despite his relatively steady 
employment, he has not shown adequate effort, due diligence, or financial responsibility 
in addressing his debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
6 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
