 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-03917 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
 Applicant has not acted to resolve the delinquent status of his student loans. 
Available information is not sufficient to overcome the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s adverse information about Applicant’s financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 14, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as part of his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated 
 
2 
 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On November 29, 2017, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
December 10, 2016 by the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without 
a hearing. On December 28, 2017, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on January 12, 2018, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to submit 
additional information in response to the FORM.4 Applicant timely responded to the 
FORM and the record closed on January 23, 2018. I received this case for decision on 
March 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes 
$15,958 for three delinquent student loans that are in collection (SOR 1.a – 1.c). Applicant 
admitted all three allegations. In a one-page statement attached with his Answer, 
Applicant cited unemployment as the chief cause of his failure to pay his student loans 
as required. Applicant also averred that he has met all of his other financial obligations 
while trying to find employment and while waiting for his security clearance. (Answer) 
 
 The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions in his Answer, and 
by the credit report presented in the FORM (Item 4). In addition to the facts thus 
established, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since September 2016. From August 2011 until December 2014, he attended 
three different colleges and financed the costs of tuition and fees through the student 
loans at issue in the SOR. Since graduating from high school in May 2011, Applicant has 
worked at various jobs with brief periods of unemployment while in school. Between June 
and September 2014, he worked as an intern at a federal agency. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
 Applicant has not made any payments on his student loans since starting his 
current job. Although he claims he is trying to establish a repayment plan, he did not 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on four enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 4). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
produce any information that corroborates his efforts. He did not present any information 
about his current income and expenses, or about any financial counseling or other 
professional assistance he may have sought to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
4 
 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Available information shows Applicant still owes more than $15,000 in delinquent 
student loans. This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant obtained student loans to finance his college costs between 2011 and 
2014. They appear to have been delinquent for about two years. Despite being steadily 
employed for most of those two years, Applicant has not taken any identifiable steps to 
pay or otherwise resolve his debts. This information requires application of the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations).  
 
By contrast, Applicant did not produce any information that warrants consideration 
of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. His financial problems are recent and ongoing. 
Although Applicant reasonably cites loss of employment and insufficient income as a 
circumstances beyond his control underlying his debts, he did not show that he has acted 
responsibly in the face of those circumstances. To the contrary, he has not acted to 
resolve his debts despite ostensibly having steady income through his current 
employment. Applicant has not sought help through financial counseling or other 
professional assistance, and he has not provided any information about his current 
finances that would support a positive, predictive conclusion that his finances will not 
continue to pose a security concern in the future. Applicant did not mitigate the security 
concerns under this guideline raised by the Government’s information. 
 
                                                 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were raised 
by his financial problems. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
