 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED COPY )  ISCR Case No. 17-03396 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs between 2001 and 2015, while possessing a 
clearance during part of that period. There is no evidence of substance misuse after 
2015. Nevertheless, the passage of time so far is insufficient to demonstrate his 
reliability, trustworthiness, ability to comply with the law, and his ability to protect 
classified information. Personal conduct and drug involvement and substance misuse 
security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
January 26, 2016. He was interviewed by a government investigator on August 9, 2017. 
After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement and substance misuse) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct) on October 13, 2017. Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 
2017, and requested a decision based on the record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
 
2 
 
 
January 2, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on January 9, 2018. He was allowed 30 
days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, extenuate, 
and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on March 23, 2018. Lacking any objections, I admitted and considered 
the Government’s proposed evidence.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
August 9, 2017. (FORM, Item 7) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could 
make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant did not respond to the FORM and waived any objections. I 
admitted the FORM’s proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations under Guidelines H and E. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He received his 
bachelor’s degree in 2008. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree. He married in 
2012, and has two children, ages four and two.  
 
Applicant has been working for different federal contractors since August 2011. 
His current employer and clearance sponsor, a federal contactor, hired him in February 
2016, and he has worked there to present. Applicant was granted a secret clearance in 
July 2012, which he has possessed since then.  
 
On August 12, 2011, Applicant submitted his first SCA. In his response to 
Question 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) Applicant disclosed that he illegally 
purchased and used marijuana between May 2001 and November 2010. He explained 
that he used marijuana towards the end of high school and throughout college. He used 
marijuana frequently in college. After college, he used it occasionally until he stopped. 
(Item 4) 
 
Between October and November 2015, Applicant participated on a pre-
employment drug screening test that resulted positive for marijuana. On December 17, 
2015, Applicant notified his then facility security officer that he tested positive for 
marijuana, and told her that his last illegal use of marijuana took place in October 2015.  
 
 
3 
 
 
On January 26, 2016, Applicant submitted another SCA. In response to Section 
23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), Applicant disclosed that in the last seven 
years he had illegally purchased and used marijuana while possessing a security 
clearance. Applicant explained that towards the end of high school and throughout 
college he illegally used marijuana frequently because he was young and immature and 
was not thinking of the future. Applicant claimed he stopped using marijuana towards 
the end of 2010 because he needed to change his life. He illegally purchased and used 
marijuana, while holding a clearance, from September to November of 2015, because 
he made a bad, stupid decision while he was going through marital issues. He also 
found out his wife was pregnant in September 2015. (Item 5) 
 
Between September and November 2015, Applicant purchased about 3.5 grams 
of marijuana on approximately four separate occasions. Applicant averred he was 
contemplating a divorce and the marijuana made him feel relaxed. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant stated he does not intend on using any illegal drugs or controlled 
substances again. He noted that he lost a job offer because he failed a pre-employment 
drug screening test. He averred he was devastated and did not want to use illegal drugs 
again because he did not want to jeopardize his and his family’s livelihood. He stated he 
realized there was not upside or positive reason for him to illegally use drugs. Applicant 
has never sought or received any medical or psychological treatment or counseling for 
his substance abuse. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.    
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
 
4 
 
 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for the illegal use of drugs:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802.  
 
Between 2001 and 2015, Applicant illegally purchased and used marijuana. He 
illegally use marijuana between 2012 and 2015, while he possessed a security 
clearance granted to him in 2012. AG ¶ 25 provides disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
The record established the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and 
(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 
6 
 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a long history of illegal 
marijuana purchase and use. Applicant disclosed in his 2011 SCA that he illegally used 
drugs between 2001 and 2010 and stopped. The 2011 SCA made him aware that the 
illegal use of drugs would create a security concern and adversely affect his eligibility for 
a clearance. He was granted a clearance in 2012. He married in 2012 and had a child. 
He continued with his education and is pursuing a master’s degree. He applied for well-
paying jobs that required his eligibility for a clearance. Notwithstanding, Applicant 
illegally used marijuana for the benefit of feeling relaxed to cope with a marital dispute. 
 
Applicant’s 2015 purchase and use of illegal drugs cast doubts on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations, and suitability to hold a clearance, especially because his recent 
substance misuse occurred after he was granted a clearance in 2012. 
 
I considered that Applicant self-reported his past illegal drug use in his 2011 
SCA, and again after he tested positive for marijuana during a pre-employment drug 
screening test in December 2015. I note, however, that he failed to disclose his 
marijuana purchase and use before he tested positive for marijuana.  
 
Applicant stated his intent to never illegally purchase and use marijuana in the 
future. In light of the record as a whole, I consider Applicant’s empty promises to be 
lacking weight and credibility. Applicant knew the adverse security clearance 
consequences of his substance misuse, and that did not dissuade him. More time 
without recurrence of substance misuse is needed for Applicant to establish his 
reliability, trustworthiness, his ability to comply with laws rules and regulations, and his 
suitability for a clearance. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concerns are based on the same facts alleged 
under Guideline H. For the sake of brevity, they will not be repeated again. 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, could affect the person's personal, professional, or community 
standing. . . . “ 
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant’s illegal purchase and use marijuana while possessing a clearance 
satisfies the above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
For the same reasons discussed under Guideline H, none of the mitigating 
conditions is fully applicable to the facts in this case and they do not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concerns. Applicant disclosed his illegal marijuana use after 
he tested positive during a drug screening because he anticipated his prospective 
employer would notify the Government and his then employer of his positive test result. 
He did not disclose his 2015 illegal use of marijuana before his failed screening test. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is a serious offense (felony), it did not occur under 
unusual circumstances, and it continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Applicant presented no evidence of counseling.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
 
8 
 
 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 2011; has held a clearance since 2012; and has worked for his 
current employer since 2016. Applicant disclosed his substance misuse in his 2011 and 
2016 SCA. He stated that he is committed to not using any illegal drugs in the future.  
 
The factors against granting a clearance are more substantial. Applicant’s lack of 
judgment and his unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations continue to raise 
questions about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. The substance misuse and personal conduct security concerns 
are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
