 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 17-01504 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant and her spouse have close relationships and regular, ongoing contact 
with family members in their native India. None of their relatives are employees of India’s 
government. Applicant, her spouse, and their children are all U.S. citizens who intend to 
reside in the United States permanently. Applicant’s ties to the United States are 
substantial and make her likely to resolve any conflict in favor of the United States. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The SOR explained why the DOD CAF 
was unable to grant her security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 21, 2017, and she requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On September 22, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On October 30, 2017, I scheduled a hearing 
for December 5, 2017. In prehearing guidance, Applicant was informed that the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) had issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
establishing the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, 
for all adjudications for national security eligibility or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.1 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government withdrew SOR allegations 
¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were admitted into evidence without 
objection. A July 14, 2017 letter forwarding discovery of the Government’s exhibits to 
Applicant was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the record but was not admitted as 
an evidentiary exhibit. A list of the Government’s exhibits was marked as HE 2. Twenty-
two Applicant exhibits (AEs A-V) were admitted without objection. Applicant and two 
witnesses testified, as reflected in a hearing transcript (Tr.) received on December 11, 
2017. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted a July 13, 2017 Request for 
Administrative Notice concerning the Republic of India (hereafter India).2 Applicant had 
no objections. Required under Appeal Board precedent to take administrative notice of 
the most current political conditions in evaluating Guideline B concerns, see ISCR Case 
No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007), I accepted the Government’s Request for 
Administrative Notice and informed the parties of my intention to take administrative 
notice, subject to the reliability of the source documentation and the relevance and 
materiality of the facts proposed. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR as amended alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s parents (SOR ¶ 
1.a), sister (SOR ¶ 1.b), and parents-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.d), are citizens and residents of 
India; that Applicant’s brother is a citizen of India who resides in the United Kingdom (SOR 
¶ 1.c); that Applicant has a bank account in India, and she provides her immediate family 
approximately $500 a month in financial support (SOR ¶ 1.e); and that Applicant owns an 
investment property in India valued at approximately $9,000 (SOR ¶ 1.f). When she 
responded to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations and provided details about her 
relatives’ circumstances. She explained that the financial support is to cover the costs of 
medical expenses for her parents and parents-in-law. Appellant expressed her 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision 
in this case. 
 
2 The Government’s Request for Administrative Notice-Republic of India, dated July 13, 2017, is based on 
U.S. government publications (pre-marked as I-X) from the Office of National Counterintelligence Executive, 
the U.S. State Department, and the U.S. Justice Department. I was provided extracts of the source materials 
but was given the URLs where the full documents could be retrieved and reviewed online. 
 
 
3 
willingness to close her non-resident bank account in India if necessary and her plan to 
sell her investment property in India around 2021 to cover some of the costs of her oldest 
son’s college tuition at that time. (Answer.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old computer software engineer with a U.S. defense 
contractor. She began working for the company in April 2016 as a contractor. Because of 
the excellent quality of her work, she was converted to a full-time permanent staff 
engineer position in March 2017. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 46-47, 57- 59.) She applied in February 
2016 for a DOD security clearance. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant was born and raised in India with her two siblings, a sister now age 36 
and a brother now age 42. Their mother retired in 2003 from a career as an elementary 
school teacher. Their father continues to work full time at age 73. He owns a 
manufacturing and fabrication business in India. (GE 1; Tr. 60-61.) 
 
Applicant earned her bachelor’s degree in computer science in India in 1996. In 
late May 2000, Applicant came to the United States for the opportunities afforded women 
in technology. In October 2001, Applicant and her spouse married in the United States. 
They had met as co-workers in India. (GE 1; AEs C, U; Tr. 57.) Applicant and her spouse 
have two sons, who were born in the United States in December 2003 and July 2010. 
(GE 1; AEs A-B.) 
 
Applicant began working as a software consultant in May 2001 with an H1-B visa. 
Her spouse was pursuing a master’s degree in the United States when Applicant 
purchased a townhouse property near her parents in India in April 2003. Her and her 
spouse’s futures in the United States were uncertain, and she had not yet established a 
credit history in the United States. (GEs 1-2; Answer; Tr. 71.) However, Applicant’s 
employment in the United States proved to be stable, and her spouse obtained his 
master’s and doctorate degrees in the United States with considerable success. (GE 1; 
AE D.) 
 
In 2001, Applicant and her spouse began providing financial support totaling $500 
monthly to their parents in India for their medical costs. Applicant transferred $1,000 every 
other month into a non-resident bank account that she has in India. As of December 2017, 
Applicant had given her parents and parents-in-law a total of $96,000 since 2001. Her 
mother and her father-in-law have access to her bank account in India. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 69-
71.) 
 
Applicant and her spouse traveled with their children to India to see their family 
members. As a citizen of India, Applicant held an Indian passport valid from November 
2004 to November 2014 that she used to travel to India in November 2005, May 2007, 
 
 
4 
June 2007, May 2011, May 2013, and December 2013. (GE 1.) In November 2014, 
Applicant renewed her passport with India. (GE 2.) 
 
After Applicant’s spouse earned his doctorate degree in computer science, he held 
a one-year appointment as a research scientist at the university from September 2012 
through August 2013. He then received a prestigious one-year appointment, renewable 
up to three years, to a postdoctoral research program at a U.S. military research 
laboratory. His position was renewed through January 2016. It meant a relocation for their 
family, and in August 2013, he and Applicant sold their first home in the United States, 
which they had bought in March 2005. Applicant teleworked from home for her longtime 
employer from her new locale. (GEs 1-2; AEs D, G, H, U.) The elder of her two sons was 
an excellent student in his new school. In January 2014, the countywide selection 
committee determined that he was eligible for full-time advanced academic programs in 
the county’s public school system. (AE R.) 
 
In April 2015, Applicant’s spouse became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant 
obtained her U.S. citizenship in June 2015 on her own application.3 (GE 1; AE U; Tr. 57-
58.) Applicant obtained her U.S. passport in July 2015. She did not use her Indian 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and had her Indian passport formally cancelled in 
early November 2015. (GEs 1-2.) 
 
In October 2015, Applicant’s spouse was offered a technical staff position at a 
monthly salary of $12,350 by a university-affiliated laboratory with DOD contracts. His 
employment was contingent in part on him obtaining and maintaining a DOD security 
clearance within a reasonable period of time. He accepted the position and was granted 
a DOD security clearance. (AEs E, U.) It meant another move for the family, and Applicant 
was unemployed in her new locale from January 2016 to April 2016, when she began 
working as a contractor for her current employer. (GE 2.) 
 
On February 19, 2016, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86.) She disclosed the residency and 
citizenship in India of her parents, sister, and parents-in-law. She indicated that she had 
daily contact with her mother, and weekly contact with her in-laws and her sister. Among 
her foreign contacts, Applicant listed her brother, who is a citizen of India residing in the 
United Kingdom. As for her foreign activities, Applicant disclosed her bank account in 
India with $6,000 in current deposits that she opened in approximately June 2010, and 
her ownership of real estate in India acquired in April 2003 for $6,000. She estimated its 
current value at $9,000. Applicant also reported her foreign travel, mostly to India, but 
also to the United Kingdom in May 2012. (GE 1.) Applicant has traveled to India with her 
spouse and children since completing her SF 86. They went to India for one month in July 
2016 and stayed at both her parents’ and her in-laws’ homes. (Tr. 63.) Applicant traveled 
on her U.S. passport. (GE 2.) 
 
 
                                                 
3 India does not recognize dual citizenship. See http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov. 
 
 
5 
 On November 14, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant explained that her Indian 
passport, which was renewed in November 2014 when she was not yet a U.S. citizen, 
was cancelled in November 2015. She denied ever experiencing any conflict of loyalty 
between India and the United States and professed her loyalty to the United States. 
Applicant indicated that she provides financial support to her parents and in-laws in India 
freely and without any obligation. She expressed an intention to continue this voluntary 
support for the foreseeable future. Concerning her townhouse in India, which was then 
valued at approximately $9,000 (Tr. 71), Applicant explained that she had purchased the 
property as an investment but that it was not important to her overall finances because 
most of her assets are in the United States. Applicant reported that she had traveled to 
India in July 2016 for pleasure, and that she did not have any unexpected or inappropriate 
contacts with law enforcement, foreign intelligence, terrorist, security, or military 
organizations. (GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother receives no benefit from India’s government. Applicant calls her 
mother daily or every other day. She talks to her father weekly. Applicant stayed with her 
parents during her trips to India.  Applicant’s father still owns his business and works full 
time at age 73. He receives no benefits from India’s government. (Tr. 60-62.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister is 36 years old and is a resident citizen of India. She works as a 
psychiatrist and has no affiliation with India’s government or military. Presently going 
through a divorce, Applicant’s sister was staying with her parents in December 2017. She 
had been living in Applicant’s townhouse in India. Applicant has contact with her sister 
once a week. Applicant’s sister visited Applicant in the United States in 2015. Applicant 
sees her sister when she is in India. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 63-64, 72.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother is 42 years old and a citizen of India with permanent residency 
in the United Kingdom. He owns a software development business with his spouse. Their 
company has an operating office in the United Kingdom and a development center in 
India. Their business provides Internet and supply solutions to the hospitality industry in 
India. Applicant communicates with her brother about once a month. She visited him in 
the United Kingdom in November 2005 and May 2012, while her brother and his family 
visited her in the United States three times, all before she began her defense contractor 
employment. (GE 1; Tr. 65-66.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a 65-year-old homemaker and her father-in-law is a 
71-year-old retiree. He previously held a management position with a company that 
makes earth-moving equipment. Applicant’s in-laws are resident citizens of India, and 
Applicant speaks with them by telephone once a week. Her in-laws receive no benefits 
from India’s government. (GE 1; Tr. 66-67.) 
 
 Applicant is planning to rent out her townhouse in India for $230 a month. (Tr. 72.) 
She intends to continue to provide financial support of $500 a month for her parents’ and 
in-laws’ medical care in India. Her Indian bank account has no more than $1,000 on 
 
 
6 
deposit at any one time. She is willing to close the account if necessary and instead wire 
funds to her parents and parents-in-law. (Tr. 70.) 
 
 Applicant attests that she would comply with all reporting requirements regarding 
her contacts with her and her spouse’s relatives in India. (Tr. 60.) She does not intend to 
return permanently to India, in part because of India’s pollution and healthcare problems 
and access to better education for her children in the United States. (AEs U, V; Tr. 76.) 
Applicant and her spouse purchased their current home in the United States in June 2016. 
They have about $100,000 in equity in their home. (AEs Q, U; Tr. 73.) Applicant’s current 
annual salary is $131,019. (AE I; Tr. 59.) Applicant has retirement (401(k) and IRA) 
accounts and savings assets exceeding $400,000 in the United States. (AEs J-O, U.) Her 
spouse has his own 401(k) and IRA accounts with about $110,000 in combined assets. 
(AE U; Tr. 74.) Applicant has college savings accounts in the United States for her sons. 
(AE P.) 
 
 Applicant was a repeated blood donor in her previous locales in the United States. 
(AE S.) She currently volunteers her time maintaining the website for a charitable 
organization that provides services locally as well as in India to persons with low vision. 
She also volunteers with a local organization that provides afterschool care and a learning 
platform for visually-impaired children in her area. (Tr. 74.) 
 
Work References 
 
Applicant’s current manager has been with their employer since March 2012. (AE 
T.) He holds a top secret clearance and access eligibility to sensitive compartmented 
information. He has worked for other defense contractors and has held a DOD security 
clearance for approximately 25 years. He testified that Applicant’s work as a contractor 
was of such benefit to the company that they converted her to an employee in March 
2017. She has continued to be an “exemplary employee.” He trusts her explicitly and has 
no doubt about her ability to properly safeguard classified information or her willingness 
to report any suspicious activity.  (Tr. 46-49.) 
 
Applicant and her spouse serve as a “surrogate family in the area” for someone 
whom her spouse mentored in graduate school in the United States. This family friend 
works for an information technology company. He is a frequent visitor to Applicant’s 
home. He socializes with Applicant and her spouse and their friends once a month at their 
house and considers them to be “sort of the model American household.” This family 
friend trusts Applicant implicitly. (Tr. 53-55.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 India is the world’s largest democracy and its government generally respects the 
rights of its citizens. India’s Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, became head of the Indian 
government following May 2014 general elections that were considered free and fair, 
despite isolated instances of violence. Even with its free press and robust democratic 
political system, a lack of accountability for misconduct in all levels of government 
 
 
7 
persists. Widespread corruption in the government and police forces, caste-based 
discrimination, and domestic violence and other abuses against women and children 
remain significant human rights problems. Separatist insurgents and terrorist groups 
remain active in areas of conflict, such as Jammu and Kashmir, the northeastern states, 
and the Maoist (“Naxalite”) belt. Insurgents were responsible for numerous cases of 
kidnapping, torture, rape, extortion, and the use of child soldiers. 
 
Anti-Western terrorist groups, including Islamic extremist groups on the U.S. 
government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, continue to plan attacks that could take 
place in locations throughout India, including where U.S. citizens or Westerners are 
known to congregate or visit. Throughout 2015, India continued to experience terrorist 
attacks, including operations launched by Maoist insurgents and transnational groups 
based in Pakistan. An attack by three Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LeT) on a bus and police station 
in the Punjab on July 27, 2015, killed four police officers and three civilians and injured 
15 others. In December 2015, news media reported that Indian officials identified former 
Uttar Pradesh resident Sanaul Haq (aka Maulana Asim Umar) as the head of al-Qa’ida in 
the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS). The South Asian Terrorism Portal, operated by the 
nonprofit Institute for Conflict Management, reports that in 2016, 145 civilians, 114 
security force members, and 324 terrorists or insurgents were killed in attacks perpetrated 
by non-Maoists. The U.S. State Department continues to warn against travel to the Indian 
states of Jammu and Kashmir (except the eastern Ladakh region and its capital) due to 
terrorism and civil unrest, and to the area within 10 kilometers of the India-Pakistan border 
due to the potential for armed conflict. U.S. citizens are advised that terrorist or armed 
groups remain active in East Central India, primarily in rural areas. Terrorists may attack 
with little to no warning and may target tourist locations, transportation hubs, markets and 
shopping malls, and local government facilities.4 
 
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India remains a leader of the developing world and is a member of 
several international organizations, including the United Nations, G-20, Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum, International Monetary Fund, World 
Bank, and World Trade Organization. India is a founding member of the Global 
Counterterrorism Forum. The United States has had longstanding economic issues with 
India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade in dual-use technology. 
In 2000, India was named in a survey of nearly a dozen Fortune 500 companies as one 
of many countries actively engaged in economic intelligence collection and industrial 
espionage directed at the United States. More recently, the concerns involve possible 
illegal exports to India by U.S. firms. In September 2008, an Indian national and an Indian 
corporation were indicted in U.S. District Court on charges of illegally supplying the 
government of India with complex electronic instruments used in the research and 
development of launching and ballistic missile delivery systems. In January 2013, the 
former export control manager of a U.S. company was sentenced to 42 months in prison 
                                                 
4 On January 10, 2018, the State Department issued a Level 2 travel advisory for India, advising travelers 
to India to exercise increase caution due to crime and terrorism. The India travel advisory may be accessed 
on the State Department’s website: https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/international-
travel/International-Travel-Country-Information-Pages/India.html. 
 
 
8 
after illegally exporting microwave amplifiers, products with military applications, to 
customers in India and China. In June 2013, an Indian citizen with a work visa and an 
alien registration card, was sentenced to time served, to 30 days supervised release, and 
restitution after he pleaded guilty to unlawful access to a protected computer. He had 
been charged with stealing proprietary information from his employer, a U.S.-based 
scientific company, and providing it to a relative in India who was starting up a competing 
company. In April 2015, the former owner of two U.S.-based defense-contracting 
businesses pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to violate the Arms Export Control 
Act by exporting to India between June 2010 and December 2012 sensitive military 
technical drawings without prior approval of the U.S. government. She was given a 
sentence of 57 months in prison in April 2016.  
 
The United States recognizes India as key to its strategic interests. The two 
countries share common values in the rule of law, respect for diversity, and democratic 
government. They share security perspectives on China and Asia with regard to the 
balance of power, on terrorism, Afghanistan, and maritime issues. They have a common 
interest in the free flow of global trade and commerce, including through vital sea lanes 
in the Indian Ocean. The United States supports India’s critical role as a leader in 
maintaining regional stability. Security ties are reflected in growing bilateral defense and 
counterterrorism cooperation. In September 2015, the United States and India issued a 
joint declaration on combatting terrorism, which reaffirmed the countries’ commitments to 
combat terrorism in all its forms and to uphold shared values of democracy, justice, and 
rule of law. The United States is one of India’s largest trade and investment partners.5  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                 
5 See the U.S. State Department’s Fact Sheet, U.S. Relations with India, issued October 9, 2015, which 
may be accessed at www.state.gov. 
 
 
9 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern about foreign influence is articulated in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that 
is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant and her spouse were born in India. They met as co-workers in India 
before coming to the United States for employment and academic opportunities in 2000. 
They married in the United States, had two children born in the United States, and 
became naturalized U.S. citizens. They continued to maintain close relationships and 
regular contact with their respective parents6 and with Applicant’s sister, who are all 
                                                 
6 There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate 
family members of his or her spouse. See ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. April 2, 2008) (citing 
 
 
10 
resident citizens of India. They traveled to India to visit these relatives annually and more 
recently every other year, including in July 2016. Applicant has provided monthly support 
of $500 to her parents and parents-in-law since 2001 to help pay for their medical needs. 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen of India who lives in the United Kingdom. Applicant has 
contact with her brother approximately monthly. She has visited him in the United 
Kingdom in 2005 and 2012, and he and his family have visited Applicant in the United 
States three times. 
 
Review of Applicant’s contacts and connections to these foreign citizens is 
warranted to determine whether they present a heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a) or AG ¶ 
7(e) or create a potential conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) 
provide: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Not every foreign contact or tie presents a heightened risk. The “heightened risk” 
denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under 
a foreign government. The nature and strength of the family ties or other foreign interests 
and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a likelihood 
of vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a family 
member is associated with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the foreign government, the administrative judge must take into account any 
terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
India and the United States have a strategic partnership of increasing importance 
to both countries. They have common values in the rule of law, respect for diversity, and 
democratic government and share interests in promoting global security, stability, and 
                                                 
ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
 
 
11 
economic prosperity. India is an ally in counterterrorism efforts. The military-to-military 
relationship has grown in the last decade, and the United States has become one of 
India’s largest trade and investment partners. However, even friendly nations may have 
interests that are not completely aligned with the United States. As noted by the DOHA 
Appeal Board, “the United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.” See ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 
19, 2004). India was among the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic intelligence 
as of 2000. There is no recent report showing direct involvement by the Indian 
government targeting the United States. However, U.S. government contractors have 
been implicated in economic espionage activity in the United States to benefit India as 
recently as December 2012. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s or her spouse’s close family members in 
India have been targeted or pressured. Nothing about her or her spouse’s family 
members’ previous or present occupations or activities creates a heightened risk. To 
Applicant’s knowledge, none of them had a direct affiliation with the Indian government, 
or any military, security, or intelligence responsibilities. Her mother worked as an 
elementary school teacher while her father continues to own and operate a manufacturing 
and fabrication business. Her father-in-law retired from a management position with a 
company that makes earth-moving equipment. Her mother-in-law did not work outside 
the home. Applicant’s sister is a psychiatrist. Applicant’s brother in the United Kingdom 
has a development facility in India, but its work is focused on the hospitality industry. 
 
Considering the democratic nature of the Indian government and society, it may 
be unlikely that the Indian government would resort to coercive means to obtain sensitive 
information. India faces threats by terrorist groups that have demonstrated a willingness 
and ability to strike civilian targets, including places frequented by foreign tourists. 
However, a distinction must be made between the risk to physical security that may exist 
and the types of concern that rise to the level of compromising Applicant’s ability to 
safeguard national security. In the last decade, India has taken security measures 
designed to combat and minimize the risk presented by terrorism. 
 
Yet, there are several factors, which collectively if not on their own create a 
heightened risk of undue foreign influence, most notably the close relationships and 
frequent contact with her parents, her spouse’s parents, and her sister. The bonds of 
affection and obligation are clearly evidenced by her financial support for both sets of 
parents. Applicant estimated at her hearing that she has given these Indian relatives 
$96,000 since 2001. Applicant’s sister lived in Applicant’s townhouse in India before she 
moved back home while going through a divorce. Applicant’s contact with her brother is 
less frequent than with her parents and sister. His residency in the United Kingdom 
minimizes the risk somewhat, but where he has a substantial business interest in India, 
the risk of undue foreign influence cannot be completely ruled out. Applicant AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), and 7(d) apply. 
 
 
 
12 
Regarding Applicant’s bank account in India and her ownership of a townhouse, 
security concerns are raised in that the bank account facilitates the transfer of financial 
support to her parents and parents-in-law. It is the familial bond that heightens the 
concern rather than the bank account or the foreign real estate. Applicant maintains no 
more than $1,000 in her bank account in India, and the townhouse is valued at 
approximately $9,000. Applicant credibly expressed a willingness to close the foreign 
bank account if necessary, and while she plans to rent out the townhouse in the near 
future, she intends to sell it when the older of her sons comes of college age to help pay 
for his tuition. Neither foreign interest is sufficiently substantial to heighten the risk of 
undue foreign interest under AG ¶ 7(f), which provides: 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, criminals in India, 
or India’s government have targeted Applicant, her spouse, or their relatives living in 
India, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International terrorist 
groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable as state 
intelligence services. Terrorists and insurgent groups have carried out attacks in India. 
The risk of terrorism in India, India’s human rights issues, and the close relationships that 
Applicant and her spouse have to their family members in India preclude full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(a), which states: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States.  
 
However, Applicant and her spouse have established very significant ties to the 
United States that could trigger the second component of AG ¶ 8(b), which states: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant came to the United States in May 2000 because of the opportunities 
afforded women in information technology. Her spouse attended graduate school in the 
United States while she worked full time as a software consultant for a company from 
May 2001 to January 2016. She started with her current employer as a contractor in April 
2016, and one year later, she was converted to a direct hire because of her excellent 
performance. After her spouse earned his doctorate degree, he held an appointment in a 
 
 
13 
postdoctoral program at a U.S. military research laboratory from September 2013 to 
January 2016. Since completing that program, he has been employed by a defense 
contractor, and he holds a DOD security clearance. It is not clear whether the financial 
support that he and Applicant provide for his parents was raised as an issue for his 
security clearance eligibility, but it may reasonably be inferred that the DOD considered 
him to be an acceptable security risk, his and Applicant’s family ties in India 
notwithstanding. 
 
Applicant and her spouse purchased their first home in the United States in 2005 
and their current home in 2016. Their two sons were born in the United States. Although 
Applicant and her spouse did not become U.S. citizens until 2015, when they were 
naturalized, they took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States, knowing when 
they did so that they lost their citizenship to India because India does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Applicant’s professional career and her financial assets are overwhelmingly 
in the United States. It is important to be mindful that Applicant, and her spouse for that 
matter, could become targets because of their support for the United States and because 
of their potential access to classified information. Applicant’s and her spouse’s ties to their 
relatives with Indian citizenship and residency are security significant. At the same time, 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships in the United States” weigh in her favor 
in granting her security clearance eligibility. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation,” does not apply. Concerning AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the 
foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in 
a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual,” it is noted that Applicant opened the Indian bank account in 2000 and bought 
the townhouse in 2003 when she was on a work visa and her spouse was a student in 
the United States. Applicant had no guarantee at that time that she and her spouse would 
someday be granted U.S. permanent residency and become U.S. citizens. Applicant’s 
foreign assets are so minimal in terms of financial value and importance to her that they 
are not likely to be a source of improper influence or pressure. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).7 The analysis under Guideline B is incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some 
                                                 
7 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
 
 
14 
of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Applicant demonstrated personal integrity by candidly detailing to the DOD her 
foreign ties, including admitting to providing some $96,000 in support to her parents and 
in-laws in India since 2001. Her manager attested to her excellent work performance, 
reliability, and trustworthiness as a contractor and now as an employee. He endorses her 
for security clearance eligibility without any reservations. The Appeal Board held in ISCR 
Case No. 01-26893, decided on October 12, 2002, that character is relevant and material 
under the whole-person concept with the following caveat: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still pose 
a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that an 
applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to classified 
information. Even good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. 
 
Acknowledging that even persons with unimpeachable character could be faced 
with a circumstance that could tempt them to place the safety of relatives ahead of 
competing interests, the risk of undue foreign influence cannot be completely ruled out 
because of Applicant’s ties to her Indian relatives as detailed above. Even so, none of 
Applicant’s or her spouse’s family members has worked for India’s government or military. 
Those family members with whom Applicant has the closest bonds, her spouse and her 
children, are U.S. citizens living in the United States. Applicant can control her response 
to the security risk. Applicant has credibly indicated that she would report any suspicious 
contacts or activity, even if it involves family members. Her manager, who has had an 
opportunity to assess her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness on a daily basis for 
over two years, is convinced that she would report any suspicious activity. Applicant is 
likely to resolve any conflict in favor of the United States. After considering all the facts 
and circumstances, I find it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security 
clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
                                                 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
15 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
