 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 17-01126 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant made sufficient progress addressing the delinquent debts listed on the 
statement of reasons (SOR). Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.      
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On May 10, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Position (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1. On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 2. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). HE 2. 
 
On June 28, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. HE 3. On August 
24, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 28, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. On November 8, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for November 30, 2017. HE 1. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered 
two exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Transcript (Tr.) 19-21; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE B. On December 
13, 2017, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing. On February 28, 2018, 
Applicant provided three post-hearing exhibits, which were admitted without objection. 
AE C-AE E. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), which are applicable to all covered individuals who require 
initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a 
sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective on 
June 8, 2017. I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new 
AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.j. HE 3. He filed a follow-up response indicating he could not confirm the status 
of his student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j because the specific loans alleged 
in the SOR did not appear on his most recent consolidated student loan list. HE 3. His 
SOR response also provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old research scientist. Tr. 6, 9. In 1992, he graduated from 
high school, and in 1995, he received a bachelor’s degree with a major in biology. Tr. 6. 
In 1998, he received a master’s degree in biology, and in 2013, he received a Ph.D. in 
environmental sciences. Tr. 6-7. Applicant served briefly and honorably in the Coast 
Guard and the Navy before entering his Ph.D. program. Tr. 7-8. His expertise is in a 
variety of highly technical fields with potential applications to the battlefield of the future. 
Tr. 9-10. Applicant has never married, and he does not have any children. Tr. 12.  
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant had negative income in 2016 because his expenses exceeded his 
income. Tr. 23. He used funds from his parents and an investor to pay his expenses. Tr. 
23. Payments he received from his parents were gifts and do not constitute income for 
federal income tax purposes. Furthermore, he does not have to repay his parents for their 
gifts. For about four years, Applicant and a university worked on a patent, and in the latter 
half of 2017, Applicant and a university obtained the patent. Tr. 11-12; SOR response. 
Applicant will receive a 40 percent royalty on the development of the patent. Tr. 11-12. 
Applicant’s monthly expenses are currently about $1,500, and he receives about $500 
monthly working as an adjunct professor. Tr. 24. He has about $2,000 in savings. Tr. 24. 
He filed his state and federal income tax returns for the previous five years. Tr. 25. He 
has been using the income from an investor to pay for international patents and for some 
of his living expenses. Tr. 24-26. He is working on further development of inventions. 
 
Applicant’s mortgage is about six months past due, and he submitted two 
mortgage-modification requests to the creditor. Tr. 27. His mortgage is about $54,000, 
and the fair market value of his home is about $135,000. Tr. 38. The creditor advised 
Applicant that the past-due payments would be rolled into a mortgage modification. Tr. 
27-28.   
 
The SOR details the following allegations, and their status is as follows:   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a 150 days past-due credit card debt for $820. In October 2017, 
Applicant paid the credit card debt. Tr. 18, 28. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i allege eight U.S. Department of Education (USDOE) 
student loan debts totaling $83,981 placed for collection for the following amounts: 
$13,214; $2,375; $9,969; $12,138; $25,446; $2,081; $8,032; and $10,726. SOR ¶ 1.j 
alleges one non-USDOE student loan debt past due for $2,110 with a total balance of 
$8,000.  
 
Applicant attended a university for 10 years to receive his Ph.D., and he accrued 
a large amount of student loan debts. Tr. 31. He was charged out-of-state tuition for the 
first seven years of his Ph.D. program. Tr. 32. Applicant maintained communications with 
his student loan creditors. Tr. 25.  
 
On March 30, 2015, Applicant wrote one student loan creditor requesting an 
income-driven student loan payment plan.3 His request indicated his monthly expenses 
exceeded his monthly income. On October 27, 2016, the student loan creditor wrote that 
Applicant’s 10 student loan debts totaling $170,743 were in a $5 monthly student loan 
rehabilitation program. On December 4, 2017, a new student loan creditor wrote Applicant 
seeking payments on student loans totaling $122,045, and Applicant requested and 
received an income-based deferment until April 2017. Applicant was notified that the 
                                            
3 The sources for the information in this paragraph are documents included as part of his response 
to the SOR. HE 3.  
 
4 
                                         
 
income-based deferment required an annual request for renewal with updated information 
about his income. On June 6, 2017, a student loan creditor wrote Applicant that the 
amount due in June 2017 on a $125,459 student loan debt was zero.    
 
Applicant incorrectly believed all of his student loans were consolidated into one 
account. Tr. 19. When he received the SOR, he learned nine student loans were not 
included in his consolidated account. Tr. 19. He could not afford the suggested payment 
plan of the unconsolidated student loans. Tr. 33-34. On September 7, 2017, Applicant 
applied to consolidate 19 student loan debts owed to three different creditors totaling 
$288,576 into one account. Tr. 28-29; AE A. He owed the largest student loan creditor 
(SLC) $197,506 before the second consolidation. AE B. SLC had difficulty correctly 
consolidating his student loans and some accounts were duplicated. Tr. 30. On December 
14, 2017, SLC wrote that student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j totaling $99,592 were 
paid and consolidated into the SLC account. AE E. His student loan debts are in an 
“income driven repayment plan.” Tr. 30-31. He said payments are deferred until his 
income increases. Tr. 31. On February 13, 2018, SLC wrote the total amount due on his 
$288,576 student loan debt for March 2018 was zero. AE E. His student loans are now 
current under an income driven repayment plan.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
 
5 
                                         
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and Director of National Intelligence have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
 
6 
                                         
 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Seven financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;5 and  
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
7 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant has a history of limited income while attempting to market and develop 
his patent. He was unable to make payments on his student loans and mortgage. His 
student loans were placed into a consolidated account with SLC. The creditor has waived 
payments until his income increases. His mortgage is pending a loan modification. His 
home could be sold, if necessary, and he has ample equity to pay his mortgage. He acted 
prudently and responsibly under the circumstances.   
 
Applicant’s failure to make payments to his mortgage and student loan creditors is 
excused due to his inability to make payments. All of Applicant’s debts are either paid, in 
current payment plans, pending possible modification, or deferred. There is sufficient 
assurance his financial problems are being resolved, under control, and will continue to 
improve in the future. Under all the circumstances, he mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                            
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old research scientist. In 1995, he received a bachelor’s 
degree with a major in biology. In 1998, he received a master’s degree in biology, and in 
2013, he received a Ph.D. in environmental sciences. He has a 40 percent interest in 
potential royalties on a patent. His expertise is in a variety of highly technical fields with 
potential applications to the battlefield of the future. He is focused on developing 
additional technology to assist in the national defense.  
 
All of Applicant’s debts are paid, in current payment plans, pending possible 
modification, or deferred. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial 
circumstances to address his delinquent debts. Applicant has established a “meaningful 
 
9 
                                         
 
track record” of debt re-payment, and he assures he will maintain his financial 
responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. It is clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
