1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 17-01242 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge of approximately $85,543 
in unsecured debt in November 2014. Two defaulted student loans then totaling $46,083 
were not discharged by her bankruptcy, and she incurred new collection debt since her 
bankruptcy. Applicant failed to demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve her debts. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance 
eligibility for her. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On June 29, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On August 30, 2017, the Government submitted a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of seven exhibits (Items 1-7). DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant and instructed her to respond within 30 days of receipt. 
Applicant received the FORM on September 6, 2017. There is no indication that she 
responded to the FORM. On December 15, 2017, I was assigned the case to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 4 summaries of subject interviews of 
Applicant conducted on August 18, 2016; November 16, 2016; and February 3, 2017. The 
summaries were part of the DOD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive, a DOD personnel background report of investigation may be 
received in evidence and considered with an authenticating witness, provided it is 
otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The interview summaries did 
not bear the authentication required for admissibility under ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 16-03126 decided on January 24, 2018, the Appeal Board held 
that it was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of 
personal subject interview where the applicant was placed on notice of her opportunity to 
object to consideration of the summary; the applicant filed no objection to it; and there is no 
indication that the summary contained inaccurate information. In this case, Applicant was 
provided a copy of the FORM and advised of her opportunity to submit objections or 
material that she wanted the administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, the FORM 
advised Applicant of the following: 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (Item 4) is being provided to the 
Administrative Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this 
case. In your response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can 
comment on whether the PSI summary accurately reflects the information 
you provided to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
summary clear and accurate. Alternatively, you can object on the ground that 
the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness and the document 
may not be considered as evidence. If no objections are raised in your 
response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, the 
Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections to 
the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as evidence 
in your case. 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded her if she was represented by legal counsel. She was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that she may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, she was 
advised that she is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by her or proven by Department Counsel and that she has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of her opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summaries, 
to comment on the interview summaries, and to make any corrections, deletions, or 
updates to the information in the report. Applicant has an associate’s degree. She can 
reasonably be held to have understood the footnote, and she did not respond to the 
FORM. In the absence of any objections or indication that the interview summaries contain 
inaccurate information, I accepted Item 4 in the record, subject to issues of relevance and 
materiality in light of the entire record. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges that, as of May 18, 2017, Applicant owed two student loans in 
collection for $27,691 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and $18,225 (SOR ¶ 1.b); four medical debts in 
collection for $902 (SOR ¶ 1.c), $706 (SOR ¶ 1.d), $326 (SOR ¶ 1.e), and $299 (SOR ¶ 
1.f); and a consumer credit debt in collection for $201 (SOR ¶ 1.g). Additionally, Applicant 
allegedly filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was discharged in November 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.h). 
(Item 1.) When Applicant answered the SOR, she admitted the allegations, which she 
attributed to her divorce and being a single parent. She indicated that she had paid over 
$8,000 toward her defaulted student loans in the last 14 months. Applicant also related that 
she had no choice but to file for bankruptcy in 2014 because her ex-husband remained in 
the marital home after their separation, and he failed to pay the mortgage and other bills for 
three years. She was held responsible for the delinquent bills associated with the home 
after foreclosure. (Item 2.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s response to the SOR as 
Item 2, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old, and she has an associate’s degree. Applicant reports that 
she was awarded her degree in approximately 2001, although available credit information 
4 
 
shows some student-loan accounts opened in April 2002. She has been employed by a 
defense contractor since July 2015. Applicant had previously worked for the company from 
February 2013 to January 2014, when she was laid off. (Items 3-5.) There is no evidence 
that she has ever held a DOD security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married to her first husband from June 1990 to February 2009. Their 
son is age 23 and their daughter is age 19. As of March 2016, both young adults were 
living with Applicant. (Items 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant held full-time employment as a field service technician at the time of her 
separation from her first husband, although no information was presented about her 
income. She moved out of the marital home in October 2008. Her ex-husband stayed in 
the house that they had purchased jointly, and he apparently did not pay the mortgage. 
Applicant asserts that she asked her ex-husband to list the home for sale and he refused to 
do so. The bank foreclosed on the home. According to Applicant, the house was sold at an 
auction for the full amount owed on the loan in December 2010. (Items 2-4.) 
 
 Applicant and her second husband married in June 2011, separated in March 2012, 
and divorced in approximately September 2012. Applicant had employment income of 
$63,205 and received child support of $3,840 in 2012. In February 2013, Applicant began 
her first tenure with her current employer. Applicant earned $57,030 in 2013. She also took 
an IRA distribution of $18,404 in 2013. Applicant was laid off in January 2014 and 
unemployed until March 2014. She supported herself and her children with her severance 
package and with child-support income of $320 per month. (Items 3-4, 7.) 
 
 Applicant worked as a contract technician from March 2014 to October 2014 at a 
monthly income of $3,300 (take-home pay of $2,453). She received $320 per month in 
child support for her daughter. Her monthly expenses totaled approximately $2,718. (Item 
7.) 
 
 In July 2014, Applicant filed a no-asset Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition after receiving 
the required credit counseling (SOR ¶ 1.h). She listed $11,965 in exempt personal property 
consisting primarily of 2013 model-year vehicle valued at $11,465. She reported cash on 
hand of $20 and $20 in checking account deposits. Of the $131,626 in listed unsecured 
nonpriority claims, approximately $22,814 was medical or dental debt. She included two 
student loans of $18,291 and $27,792; a $6,042 deficiency balance on a vehicle loan; an 
$18,371 consumer credit debt in collection; a $32,937 collection debt; and some smaller 
collection debts for utility and telecommunications services.  She was granted a Chapter 7 
discharge in November 2014, which did not relieve her of her legal repayment liability for 
her student loans. (Item 7.) Applicant asserts that she had to file for bankruptcy because 
when her ex-husband lost their marital home to foreclosure, the creditors owed debts 
associated with the home pursued her for the debts, and she was unable to pay them. 
(Item 2.) 
 
 In October 2014, Applicant began working as a contractor on a local military base. 
She lost her job when the contract ended in February 2015. She held part-time work until 
5 
 
she was rehired by her present employer in July 2015 for a full-time information technology 
manager position. She continued to also work part time nights and weekends until March 
or April 2016. (Items 3-4.) 
 
 On March 16, 2016, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions. She disclosed her bankruptcy filing; the 
mortgage delinquency on her marital home, which she indicated was resolved in December 
2010 through foreclosure and sale of the property at an auction; $23,000 in defaulted 
federal student loan debt that she indicated was brought current by garnishment of her 
wages for a year; and a $15,000 car loan deficiency that she resolved through payments of 
the balance after the car was sold at an auction. (Item 3.) 
 
 As of April 30, 2016, Equifax was reporting that Applicant owed $26,264 (SOR ¶ 
1.a) and $17,285 (SOR ¶ 1.b) in student loan collection balances. Two medical debts 
incurred after Applicant filed for bankruptcy were reportedly in collection for $706 (SOR ¶ 
1.d) and $299 (SOR ¶ 1.f). (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed on August 18, 2016, by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant admitted her bankruptcy filing, which 
she attributed to her divorce and loss of employment. On review of the accounts listed on 
her SF 86, Applicant indicated that her student loans had been brought into good standing 
by wage garnishment. She did not recognize the student-loan collection balances reported 
on her credit record and indicated that she would look into the accounts within the next few 
days. Applicant was then confronted with the unsecured claims on her bankruptcy petition. 
She did not recall several of the accounts. Regarding several of the medical bills, including 
$13,860 owed a hospital, Applicant indicated that the bills were her ex-husband’s 
responsibility. She stated that her ex-husband filed a joint bankruptcy petition and the 
debts “showed up with her name attached.” (Item 4.) 
 
 On December 16, 2016, Applicant signed a release for the OPM investigator for the 
two delinquent student loans on her credit record. When re-interviewed by the OPM 
investigator in February 2017, Applicant explained that she obtained the student loans in 
approximately 2000. She claimed that the loans were being repaid at $5,000 to $6,000 per 
year by the government taking her income tax refunds. (Item 4.) 
 
 As of March 2017, Equifax was reporting no progress on the student loans in 
collection, which had updated balances of $27,691 and $18,225. No activity had been 
reported on the accounts since January 2013. Additionally, Applicant reportedly owed three 
medical collection debts of $902, $706, and $326 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e) and a $201 consumer 
collection debt from January 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.g). Applicant was $1,284 past due on an 
automobile loan obtained in January 2015 for $19,476 (not alleged). (Item 5.) 
 
 The DOD CAF issued the SOR to Applicant on May 18, 2017, because of 
unresolved financial delinquencies. (Item 1.) In response, Applicant indicated that the two 
federally-guaranteed student loans originally totaled $18,000. She expressed “shock” at the 
total balance. She acknowledged that, as a single parent since 2008, she had not 
6 
 
previously been in a position to make timely payments. Applicant stated that she was now 
in position to make repayment arrangements. When she signed her answer to the SOR, 
Applicant added in handwriting, “I have also paid over $8,000 in the last 14 mos.” Applicant 
did not dispute the medical charges, but indicated that her children’s father was supposed 
to pay them. She asserted that she would make repayment arrangements for the medical 
debts. Applicant did not recognize the $201 collection debt, but stated that she would make 
every effort to contact the creditor and pay it. (Item 2.) As of October 2017, Applicant had 
not provided any documentation confirming the $8,000 in claimed student loan payments 
or of any payments or payment arrangements on the other accounts in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
7 
 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result 
from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
 Applicant is not required to be debt free, but she is required to manage her finances 
in a way as to exhibit sound judgment and responsibility. The concern under Guideline F is 
broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly compromise classified 
information in order to raise money to address debts. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. 
 
 Guideline F security concerns are established by the defaulted student loans, by the 
debts that led her to file for bankruptcy in July 2014, and by the collection debts incurred 
after she received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. Although Applicant maintains that the 
medical collection debts were her first husband’s responsibility, the debts were listed on 
her April 2016 and March 2017 credit reports. In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. 
Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that she is not responsible for the debt 
or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
Three disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 apply: (a), “inability to satisfy debts,” (b), 
“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so,” and (c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
8 
 
 Applicant has the burden of establishing one or more of the following potentially 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. She obtained her student loans more than 15 years 
ago, but they continue to cast doubts on her financial judgment, given the lack of 
demonstrated progress toward resolving them in recent years. Available credit reports 
show no activity on the loans since January 2013. The collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.g 
were incurred after Applicant was given a financial fresh start by her Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
discharge in November 2014. The delinquency in SOR ¶ 1.g was incurred despite her full-
time employment since July 2015. 
 
 Applicant’s divorce from her first husband is a circumstance contemplated within AG 
¶ 20(b). It could mitigate some of the financial concerns that led her to file for bankruptcy 
relief in 2014 if she was pursued for household or medical debts for which her ex-husband 
had some legal responsibility. Yet Applicant presented no documentation from which I 
could make credible findings as to which debts included in her bankruptcy should have 
been paid by her ex-husband. Concerning her defaulted student loans, which survived her 
bankruptcy, and the collection debts in the SOR, which were incurred since her bankruptcy 
filing, Applicant’s finances were compromised from February 2015 through June 2015 
because of a lack of full-time employment. However, she has done little since then to 
address the delinquencies on her credit record. When contacted by the OPM investigator 
in February 2017, Applicant acknowledged her student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b). She 
indicated that the government was taking her income tax refunds and applying them to her 
9 
 
debt. Available information shows no activity on her defaulted student loans since 2013, so 
it had been some time since her tax refunds were seized or the income tax seizures were 
not reflected in her credit reports. In any event, Applicant did not meet her burden to show 
that payments were made to address her student loan debts in the last four years.  
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is undermined by the lack of any evidence on her part to 
contact her creditors and make repayment arrangements in recent years. 
 
 While AG ¶ 20(c) has some applicability in that Applicant has been discharged from 
legal repayment liability for a large share of the unsecured debts included in her Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, neither AG ¶ 20(c) nor AG ¶ 20(d) applies to her defaulted student loans that 
were included but not discharged in her bankruptcy or the collection debts incurred since 
her bankruptcy discharge. Available credit information fails to substantiate her 
uncorroborated assertion that she paid over $8,000 toward her defaulted student loans in 
the last 14 months. Applicant did not submit the documentation needed under AG ¶ 20(e) 
to prove that she has no legal repayment liability for the medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.f) 
that she asserts were her ex-husband’s responsibility. She acknowledges that the student 
loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b) are solely her responsibility. The consumer collection debt in SOR 
¶ 1.g was not incurred until late 2015, well after her divorce. I have credited Applicant with 
mitigating SOR ¶ 1.h because her decision to file for relief under Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code was reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. There is no 
evidence showing any of the SOR debts have been paid. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d). The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The security clearance adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s 
personal debts. Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). At the same time, Applicant has the burden of presenting 
evidence of relevant facts and circumstances to show why she should be granted security 
clearance eligibility notwithstanding the delinquent debt information on her credit record. 
Available credit reports show that the delinquent balances on her student loans increased 
from $26,264 and $17,285 in March 2016 to $27,691 and $18,225 in February 2017. No 
progress was shown on repaying the collection debts. It is not enough in mitigation to 
assert that her ex-husband should have paid the medical debts or that student loan 
payments have been made, whether voluntarily or by interception of tax refunds, without 
some corroboration of those payments. 
 
 The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an 
applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking 
security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, 
10 
 
citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). Based on the evidence before me, I am unable to 
conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance 
eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
