 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-02087  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes more than $59,000 in delinquent student loan debt, and his 
former home was foreclosed in 2015 after he stopped paying his mortgage loan. He 
offered insufficient evidence of efforts or means to resolve his debts, or to establish 
rehabilitation. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 28, 2016, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On June 30, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), which are effective for all national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 19, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
August 16, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 16, 2017, and received by him on September 14, 2017. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant timely submitted additional information in response to the FORM, did 
not file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond 
beyond the 30-day period he was afforded.  
 
 Applicant’s FORM response is marked exhibit (AE) A and is admitted in 
evidence, without objection by Department Counsel. Items 1 through 5 are also 
admitted in evidence. Item 6 is an unsworn and unauthenticated summary of Applicant’s 
interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), who 
prepared and submitted it as part of the Report of Investigation (ROI). Applicant was 
silent with respect to his right to object to its admissibility under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, due 
to lack of authentication, and was not asked to adopt the summary as his own 
statement. Accordingly, Item 6 is admitted into evidence for the limited purpose of 
considering any extenuating or mitigating evidence contained therein. It will not be 
considered as a source of evidence supporting any disqualifying conditions or whole-
person security concerns adverse to Applicant.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married, with two children ages 9 and 7. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree in May 2003, and a master’s degree in December 2009. He took 
additional graduate coursework at a university from August 2010 to April 2014, but did 
not complete another degree. He has no military or federal civil service, and this is his 
first application for a security clearance. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, with some explanations. The 
record credit report entries, upon which the SOR allegations are based, indicate that his 
seven delinquent Federal Department of Education student loan debts total $59,494; 
range from $2,786 to $18,537; were opened between 2008 and 2010; and were placed 
for collection in October 2013. On September 12, 2017, Applicant entered into a loan 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
rehabilitation agreement with the collection agency that requires him to make nine 
monthly payments of $287 starting on September 20, 2017. The agreement covers all 
seven delinquent loans, on which the total outstanding balance had then grown to 
$75,173. Upon successful completion of these terms, the seven delinquent loans would 
be transferred to the Department of Education’s loan servicer for recapitalization and 
calculation of a new required monthly payment, and would no longer be considered to 
be in default. No evidence of any payments under this last-minute agreement was 
submitted. (Item 2; Item 4; Item 5; AE A.) 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant opened about $119,000 in mortgage loans from his state 
housing development authority for the home that he purchased and lived in until 
December 2012. He and his family then moved into the home of his father-in-law and 
mother, located in a different city, to provide support during his mother’s treatment for 
cancer. In September 2013, Applicant and his family rented a home and moved to 
another city closer to his new job. Applicant reported full-time employment from May 
2004 to May 2013 in the city where he owned the home, and different full-time 
employment near his current rented home from May 20132 until he submitted his e-QIP 
in late April 2016. However, in his answer to the SOR, he said that he was unemployed 
during the nine months in 2013 when he and his family lived with his mother, and that 
he was on public assistance during that time. No clarification of these contradictory 
statements concerning his employment status was provided. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant unsuccessfully tried several times from 2011 to 2013 to sell the home 
that he owned. At the time, homes in his neighborhood were selling for around $70,000 
but he still owed more than $115,000 to his mortgage lender. During 2013 and 2014, he 
had several tenants who lived in the home but did not pay the rent. According to the 
record credit reports, Applicant stopped making mortgage payments in July 2014; the 
lender foreclosed on the property in January 2015; and the home sold for about $63,000 
in May 2015. (Item 2; Item 3; Item 4; Item 5.)   
 
 Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter commending Applicant’s honesty, hard work, 
and motivation to deliver his expertise and excellent service to the Navy Reserve 
members for whom they are contracted to provide support. He said that Applicant is 
trustworthy with sensitive information, knowledgeable about required procedures, and 
held in high regard by Navy leadership with whom he interacts. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling or other efforts to improve 
his financial management abilities. He provided no budget information from which to 
predict his future solvency, or his ability to make payments toward his delinquent debts. 
I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
                                                 
2 During his OPM interview, Applicant said the March 2013 start date for employment in the new city, 
which he reported on page 12 of his e-QIP, was a mistake. He said that employment started in May 2013, 
but otherwise affirmed that these e-QIP employment dates were correct. (Item 6.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has incurred more than $59,000 in delinquent Federal student loan 
debts since 2008, and stopped making required mortgage payments to a state housing 
agency leading to foreclosure on his former home. He documented neither the ability 
nor actual payments toward satisfying these debts. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s multiple delinquent debts are substantial and ongoing. His failure to 
address any of these debts in a meaningful way before the record closed creates 
ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither documented that any of his delinquent debts arose from 
circumstances beyond his control, nor showed that he acted responsibly under such 
circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He offered no evidence of 
financial counseling or budget information establishing a future ability to repay his 
delinquencies. He failed to demonstrate that theses problems are being resolved, are 
under control, or that a good-faith effort toward resolution has actually been initiated. 
The last-minute student loan rehabilitation agreement, with no evidence of making 
required payments, is insufficient. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of 
financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He voluntarily defaulted on his underwater home 
mortgage, and continues to owe more than $75,000 in delinquent Federal student loan 
debts toward which he made no required payments. He basically ignored this obligation 
to the Federal Government, from which he seeks national security eligibility, until faced 
with the imminent denial of that clearance. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or 
duress remains undiminished, and recurrence of irresponsible behavior was not shown 
to be unlikely. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s 
trustworthiness, reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate security concerns under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance or permit his employment in sensitive duties. National security eligibility is 
denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
