 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-03297 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 25, 2015. 
On December 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines H and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 12, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On January 29, 2018, the Government sent a complete 
copy of its written case, a file of relevant material (FORM) including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 6, to Applicant. He was given an opportunity to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation to the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on February 1, 
2018, and timely submitted his response, to which the Government did not object. Items 
 
2 
 
1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant, age 34, has been married since 2005. They have two children, ages 
11 and 8. He graduated high school in 2002. He honorably served in the U.S. Air Force 
from 2005 until January 2013. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2015. Since 2015, he 
has been employed as a software-development analyst by the same defense contractor 
(Company A) who previously employed him from January 2013 until September 2013. 
He was granted a security clearance in 2010.  
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline H, and cross-alleged under Guideline E, that 
Applicant misused Percocet (SOR ¶¶ 1.a/2.a) and Vicodin (SOR ¶¶ 1.b/2.a) 
prescriptions in August 2013, and stole prescription painkillers from a co-worker on 
multiple occasions (SOR ¶¶ 1.c/2.a). In his SOR answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a, 
without explanation, and SOR ¶ 1.c on that basis that it occurred only one time. 
 
The SOR also alleged under Guideline E that Applicant falsified material facts 
about the incidents alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. on his 2015 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.e), 
during his 2016 (SOR ¶ 2.b) and 2017 (SOR ¶ 2.c) security clearance interviews, and in 
his 2017 response to interrogatories propounded by the Government (SOR ¶ 2.d). In his 
SOR answer, Applicant admitted each of these allegations and explained that they were 
caused by his fear of admitting the worst mistake of his life. He averred that they do not 
“show the type of person [that he is].”  
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant explained that “fear” caused him not to tell 
investigators “what [he] did.” He also stated that he was worried about “costing [himself] 
another job.” In his FORM response, Applicant described himself as a “good and 
honest” person who made “one huge mistake.” He acknowledged wrongdoing in 
stealing the prescriptions from his co-worker and then not being honest about it during 
his investigation. He averred that he is trying to be a better man and better person. He 
asserted that he is great at his job and has much to offer his employer. He expressed 
remorse for his actions in both his SOR answer and FORM response. 
 
Prescription Use and Misuse History 
  
 Applicant’s first encounter with prescription medication was in high school, in 
2002 when he was approximately 18 years old. He had surgery on his foot and was 
prescribed Vicodin. In 2007, when he was approximately 24 years old, he was 
prescribed Vicodin after he tore his rotator cuff. Between the summer of 2007 and 2008, 
he had two separate surgeries to remove wisdom teeth. He was prescribed Percocet on 
both occasions. In 2008, he was prescribed Vicodin after he had a cyst removed from 
his wrist. In 2011, he was prescribed unspecified pain medication after he was involved 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2) and his SCA (Item 3). 
 
 
3 
 
in a motorcycle accident that required surgery on his shoulder. From 2009 through 
2017, he had ten separate foot surgeries. He was prescribed unspecified pain 
medication on each occasion. During that same period, he was also prescribed 
unspecified pain medication on each occasion that he had kidney stones, which was 
approximately three to four times. Applicant recalled that the longest duration that he 
was “without any pain medication” was approximately eight to nine months, but he did 
not specify any dates.2  
 
 On two occasions in August 2013, during Applicant’s first job with Company A 
while working on an Air Force base, he stole prescription pain medication from his co-
worker. On the first occasion, he stole approximately three or four Percocet pills, which 
had emptied the prescription bottle. Approximately two weeks later, he stole 
approximately five to six Vicodin pills, which had emptied the prescription bottle. After 
each theft, he ingested the pills, one at a time, during the course of 24 hours on the 
same day that he stole them, including at work and at home. He was caught after the 
co-worker reported the incidents and caused the Air Force Security Forces (AFSF) to 
initiate an investigation. When confronted by AFSF, Applicant admitted that he stole the 
medication on two occasions, but denied the amounts alleged and claimed that he only 
took two or three the first time and two the second time. He explained that he took the 
pills because of “physical pain and home problems.” After Company A took his access 
badge, Applicant resigned. During his security investigation, Applicant maintained that 
he was never fired, but in his response to the FORM, he acknowledged that the 
incidents caused him to lose his first job with Company A. He also maintained that he 
was never arrested, but the AFSF incident report reflects that he was fingerprinted and 
that booking photos were taken. The investigation was closed without any action taken 
by the Commander.3 
 
 Applicant does not believe that he is addicted to pain medication, but 
acknowledged that he “could be.” He has never sought help nor has he ever been 
diagnosed as abusing drugs or being drug dependent. However, in 2011 or 2012, while 
on active duty, his first sergeant recommended that he attend an Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Prevention and Treatment (ADAPT) program. Before that recommendation, 
Applicant had attended a meeting with the first sergeant, physician, and pharmacist due 
to a concern about the amount of pain medication that Applicant had been prescribed 
over a year and a half and that he had taken over the years. Applicant successfully 
completed the ADAPT program.4  
 
 Applicant’s most recent reported use of prescription pain medication was June 
18, 2017. He did not specify whether that use was as prescribed. In his November 2017 
                                                          
2 Item 6 at 2. 
 
3 Items 5 and 6. 
 
4 Item 6 at 2-3. 
 
 
4 
 
responses to interrogatories, he reported that he did not intend to illegally use Vicodin in 
the future (albeit alongside a falsification concerning his misuse of Vicodin in 2013).5 
 
Security Clearance Investigation History 
 
 Applicant lied or was less than candid about the facts and circumstances 
surrounding his theft and misuse of prescription pain medication on five occasions 
during his security clearance investigation. First, he failed to report either the theft or 
misuse on his August 2015 SCA. Second, during his initial security clearance interview 
in August 2016, while he acknowledged being questioned by AFSF about the theft, he 
denied that he was arrested or that had stolen the prescription pain medication.  
 
Third, during a follow-up security clearance interview in June 2017, Applicant 
initially claimed that his co-worker gave him one prescription pain pill and provided false 
facts and circumstances to support that story. After the interviewer reminded Applicant 
that he had reviewed records and interviews about the incident, Applicant apologized 
and volunteered that he did take prescription pain pills from his co-worker. He claimed 
that he only stole two Vicodin pills on one occasion. He acknowledged that he should 
have reported it as a “charge[], conviction[], or sentence[] of a crime . . . within the past 
seven years” on his SCA. He also admitted that he has misused his own prescribed 
pain medication by taking more pills than were prescribed. He stated that he never told 
his wife about the 2013 incident because he was scared that she would be upset or 
worry. He also lied to her about why he lost his first job with Company A by claiming that 
he was laid off.  
 
Applicant signed a sworn statement summarizing portions of his June 2017 
interview. In that statement, he certified to its accuracy, including the following: 
 
I didn’t list or provide [the information about my theft and misuse of my co-
worker’s prescription pain medication (Incident)] on my [SCA] or discuss it 
with the [agent conducting the interview (Agent)] prior to [the date of the 
interview] because I was scared and unsure of what to do . . . I didn’t think 
the Agent knew about the [Incident] because they didn’t ask me anything 
about it. I took a chance by not bringing it up to the Agent and not listing 
the incident on my [SCA] and was hoping no one would find out. I didn’t 
know if the Agent or agency that conducts my background investigation 
communicated with the [Air Force base on which the Incident occurred 
(Base)] or obtained the information from the [Base].  
 
Fourth, in his November 2017 response to interrogatories, Applicant claimed that 
he misused only one Vicodin pill on only one occasion in September 2013, which he 
acknowledged that he stole from his co-worker. He also certified the accuracy of his 
June 2017 interview. 
  
                                                          
5 Item 6 at 4; Item 4 at 2. 
 
 
5 
 
Fifth, in his December 2017 SOR answer, Applicant averred that he stole 
prescription painkillers from his co-worker only one time, not twice.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”6 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”7 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”8 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
                                                          
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
7 Egan at 527. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
9 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
6 
 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”11 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.12 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.13 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.14 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”15 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16 
 
Analysis 
 
 The facts and circumstances of Applicant’s theft and misuse of prescription pain 
medication that are described in the Findings of Fact were summarized from the record. 
Because Applicant provided so many different versions of events, there are remains a 
question of what is the whole truth. 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
“The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.”  
 
Applicant’s theft and misuse of prescription pain medication establish the 
following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:17 
                                                          
11 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
17 The SOR allegations concerning Applicant’s drug treatment (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.j, 1.m) do not establish any 
disqualifying conditions under Guideline H and E. If anything, they support mitigation. 
 
7 
 
AG ¶  25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position. 
 
None of the following potentially applicable mitigating conditions under this 
guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(c): abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended. 
 
Applicant misused his own and stolen prescription pain medication over an 
extended period, including while in possession of a security clearance. During the 2013 
incidents, he was 30 years old and married with children. Applicant has been 
prescribed, and potentially overprescribed, pain medication over the years for physical 
pain associated with approximately 15 surgeries (11 were foot surgeries) that took place 
between 2002 and 2017. While Applicant averred that he did not intend to misuse 
Vicodin again (albeit alongside a false statement about his Vicodin misuse), he did not 
provide a signed statement of that intent with automatic revocation of his clearance for 
any violation, nor state an intent not to misuse other types of pain medication. Applicant 
acknowledged that his misuse in 2013 was not solely to treat physical pain. Despite his 
history, Applicant has never admitted that he has an addiction to pain medication, but 
he did acknowledge that he “could be.” Applicant has never voluntarily sought help or 
treatment for his use and misuse of pain medication. As recent as July 2017, Applicant 
had still been using pain medication for his ongoing foot pain. I have substantial doubts 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, and am unable to 
conclude unequivocally that Applicant’s misuse of prescription pain medication has 
ended and is not likely to recur.  
  
 
8 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Applicant’s theft and misuse of prescription pain medication establish the general 
concerns involving questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, and the following specific disqualifying condition under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
Based on the uncontroverted SOR allegations and Applicant’s admissions, the 
following additional disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative.  
 
An applicant's completion of an SCA is the initial step in requesting a security 
clearance and the investigative process is contingent upon the honesty of the applicant.  
Beginning with an applicant’s responses in the SCA, 
 
The security clearance investigation is not a forum for an applicant to split 
hairs or parse the truth narrowly. The Federal Government has a 
compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information. 
That compelling interest includes the government's legitimate interest in 
being able to make sound decisions (based on complete and accurate 
information) about who will be granted access to classified information. An 
applicant who deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid answers to 
the government in connection with a security clearance investigation or 
adjudication interferes with the integrity of the industrial security 
program.18 
 
Applicant’s misuses of his own and stolen prescription pain medication over an 
extended period establish a pattern of questionable judgment that calls into question his 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Even more egregious 
was his repeated failure to avail himself of numerous opportunities to be forthcoming 
and candid about the facts and circumstances surrounding his misconduct during 
various phases of the security clearance investigations process. Applicant has not 
demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior to demonstrate reform. I have 
serious doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
None of the potentially applicable mitigating conditions under this guideline applies.19  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
                                                          
18 ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
19 AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts); AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); 
and AG 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed 
to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur). 
 
10 
 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline H and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his theft and misuse of prescription pain medication and his lack of 
candor about it during the security clearance investigations process. Accordingly, 
Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse): AGAINST 
APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it not is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
