 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02510 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F. On September 20, 2017, Applicant answered the 
SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 15, 
2017, was provided to him by letter dated November 17, 2017. Applicant received the 
FORM on December 1, 2017. He was afforded 30 days to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
information within the 30-day period, which was received without objection.1 On January 
16, 2018, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old network analyst employed by a defense contractor 
since December 2015. He seeks to renew his security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. (Items 3, 7)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1992. He was awarded an associate’s 
degree in business administration in 2006, and a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration in 2017, both degrees earned from an on-line university. He served in the 
U.S. Air Force from 1992 to 1996, and was honorably discharged. Applicant married in 
2003 and divorced in 2004. He remarried in 2005, and has two minor children. (Items 3, 
7; SOR response) 
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges four debts totaling $26,640. Summarized, they are: 1.a 
– charged-off credit card account for $14,094; 1.b – charged-off credit card account for 
$8,277; 1.c – charged-off credit card account for $3,529; and 1.d - charged-off credit 
card account for $740.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d) These debts are established through 
Applicant’s admissions and the Government’s evidence. (Items 2 – 5, 7, FORM 
response) 
 
Department Counsel noted in his FORM that Applicant failed to explain how his 
debts were incurred or why he ignored them so long that his creditors charged them off. 
Applicant explained in his FORM response that he incurred these debts during a 
transition after he was injured during an Army training program and was required to 
accept another job in a different location. In addition, during this job transition, his wife 
was having a difficult pregnancy with their second son. To address her condition, 
Applicant took time off from work to escort his wife to the Philippines to stay with her 
family where she could receive “special care.” He used credit cards to bridge the gap 
between job changes and to cover travel costs. (Item 2, FORM response) 
 
To address these debts, Applicant retained the services of a law firm (LF) 
specializing in debt resolution in August 2015. The LF set up a debt resolution plan for 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s additional information will be referred to as FORM response.  
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s four SOR debts that began in August 2015 with monthly payments of $743 
payable by direct debit. Under the current payment schedule, all of the SOR debts will 
be paid off in August 2018. Applicant stated that the LF allowed his creditors to write off 
his credit card debts in order to negotiate a payment plan. Applicant provided 
documentation of the plan developed by the LF as well as proof of payments to date. 
(Item 2; FORM response) 
 
Applicant has provided 25 years of cumulative service to the Government as an 
Air Force veteran and as a defense contractor. During those years, he successfully held 
a security clearance. As a defense contractor, he spent significant periods overseas to 
include Iraq, Afghanistan, South Korea, Kuwait, Qatar, and Guantanamo Naval Base. 
He is currently working in the Mideast on a contract expiring in November 2018. (Items 
2, 3, 6; FORM response) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”   
 
The evidence establishes the validity of the allegations and the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) 
because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and his 
behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement.   
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant was injured in an Army 
training exercise that required him to change jobs and job locations, and incurred the 
travel costs associated with escorting his pregnant wife to the Philippines to receive 
proper care. He used high interest credit cards in order to make ends meet during that 
“transition” period.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and 20(d) is fully applicable. Although 
Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, his debts are resolved or being 
resolved and there are clear indications that his financial problems are under control. As 
noted above, Applicant engaged the services of a law firm specializing in debt 
resolution. He initiated his debt consolidation plan in August 2015, well before his 
September 2017 SOR was issued. Applicant stated that LF allowed his creditors to write 
off his credit debt card debt to prompt the credit card companies to negotiate a payment 
plan. Given Applicant’s resources and situation at the time, he approached his debts in 
a responsible and measured way.3 AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
                                                          
3“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. Applicant’s past military service and many years of 
employment as a defense contractor weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding 
citizen and a productive member of society. Applicant has a viable plan in place and his 
debts are being resolved. He is currently serving in the Mideast with a defense 
contractor. Applicant understands what he needs to do to maintain financial 
responsibility.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
      
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
