 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-03282 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 14, 
2016. On October 20, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On February 5, 2018, the Government sent a complete 
copy of its written case, a file of relevant material (FORM) including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5, to Applicant. He was given an opportunity to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation to the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on February 8, 
 
2 
 
2018, and did not respond. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 
5 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant, age 61, has three adult children. He was divorced from his wife of 16 
years in 1996. He has cohabited with his fiancé since 2015. He honorably served in the 
U.S. Army from 1976 until 1992. He has been employed full time by a defense 
contractor since 1984. He earned an associate’s degree in 1990, and a bachelor’s 
degree in 1993. He has maintained a security clearance since at least 2006.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file, as required, his state income tax returns for tax 
years 2011 through 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He had the financial ability to pay, but failed to 
do so because of laziness and procrastination. Although it was not alleged it the SOR,2 
Applicant accrued state income tax debts totaling approximately $6,590 for tax years 
2012 through 2016. He planned to file all of his delinquent returns by mid-January 2018, 
and to pay his delinquent taxes by September 2018. He also planned to adjust his state 
tax exemption to withhold additional income. 
 
 Applicant agreed to reimburse his ex-wife for attorney’s fees totaling $7,500 that 
she incurred to finalize a consent order concerning the division of his retirement 
benefits. After Applicant failed to timely reimburse her, his ex-wife obtained a court 
judgment and placed a lien on Applicant’s home for the amount owed. In June 2017, 
Applicant reached an agreement with his ex-wife to resolve the debt. In November 
2017, the judgment was satisfied and the lien was released. Applicant did not explain 
why he failed to timely pay this debt. 
 
 Applicant averred that he lives within his means, and timely pays his household 
expenses. His 2017 credit report revealed no delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”3 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his 2017 security clearance 
interview (Item 5). Item 5 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, Applicant 
was informed by Department Counsel that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
updates to Item 5. Applicant was also informed that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 5 on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM, I conclude that 
he has waived any objection to Item 5. ISCR Case No. 14-06781 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016). 
 
2 Because his tax debt was not alleged in the SOR, I will consider it only to evaluate mitigation and whole 
person. 
 
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
3 
 
information.”4 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”6 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”8 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.9 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
                                                          
4 Egan at 527. 
 
5 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
6 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
4 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.11 
  
 An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”12 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.14  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his credit reports establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of 
the ability to do so), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 
19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required). 
 
  
  
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
13 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 These security concerns have not been mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s failure to timely file his tax returns and pay his delinquent taxes over 
an extended period, and to timely pay his wife’s attorney’s fees are recent events. The 
fact that Applicant waited until after a judgment and lien were entered against him 
undermines the positive value attributed to him finally paying the fees, especially 
because he did not provide a good reason for the delay. Applicant had not yet filed his 
delinquent tax returns or paid his delinquent taxes as of December 2017, when he 
completed his SOR answer. He failed to respond to the FORM or otherwise provide 
updates on any efforts made since then. The irresponsible manner with which Applicant 
handles his financial obligations casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Accordingly, I cannot conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
Guideline F concerns at this time. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
 
6 
 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his financial irresponsibility. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
