 
1 
  
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00382 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March 22, 2017, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing Guideline F, financial considerations security 
concerns. On April 7, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. On April 25, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006, and as amended on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
Material (FORM). The FORM contained six attachments (Items). Applicant received a 
copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the Government’s 
evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying 
conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to submit any additional 
information in response to the FORM. On July 20, 2017, Applicant submitted six 
documents, which were admitted without objection, as Exs. A through F. On October 1, 
2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted owing $17,113 on 13 medical bills 
plus owing two state tax liens of $39,095 and $70,791. His SOR answer provided no 
additional information about his medical bills or state tax liens. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old technical writer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 2010, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) He has been 
married since July 1992 and has two children ages 18 and 14. He has not served in the 
military. 
 In 2003, Applicant started opening fast-casual restaurants. In the following two 
years, he opened four restaurants and began investing in real estate and speculation 
(“spec”) homes. (Ex. A) He asserts a downturn in the economy caused his businesses to 
fail. His liabilities were more than $1,500,000 when he filed for bankruptcy protection in 
2009. (Item A) He asserts his bankruptcy attorney told him to ignore his state taxes 
resulting in the state placing liens on his home. (Item A) 
In Applicant’s February 3, 2016 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he omitted his financial delinquencies. (Item 3) He did not list his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed on February 1 or 2, 2009 because it was one day outside the 
seven-year scope of the financial questions. (Item 4) It is noted, the debts were not 
discharged until May 2009, which were within the scope of the financial questions. (Item 
4). He did not list the state tax liens because he thought they were not within the seven-
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 
year scope of the question. The liens were filed in 2008, which is beyond the scope of the 
question. 
 In August 2016, during Applicant’s enhanced subject interview, he was questioned 
about the SOR delinquent obligations. He asserts a downturn in the economy caused his 
business to fail resulting in him filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2007. No 
bankruptcy documents were submitted into the record. He asserts the majority of the 
liability was business related. (Item 4) His home mortgage is delinquent due to a house 
fire and the loss of insurance, which resulted in a $300 additional amount being added to 
his monthly mortgage payment. (Item 4) He does not know the amount of the delinquency 
because his wife handles the household’s finances. However, his credit report indicates 
he was $4,819 past due. (Item 5)  
 On Applicant’s e-QIP, he did not list his medical bills for emergency room treatment 
of kidney stones due to an “oversight.” (Item 4) His February 2016 credit report indicates 
the 11 medical collection debts (SOR 1 a. – m.) were incurred in July and August 2013. 
(Item 5) During his August 2016 personal subject interview, he acknowledged the debts 
were turned over to a collection agency, and he was making $25 monthly payments. He 
did not indicate if he was paying $25 on each medical debt or was paying $25 monthly on 
all the medical debts in total. (Item 4) He stated his spouse had knowledge of the debts, 
but he had no additional pertinent information regarding the debts. (Item 4) 
 Applicant has provided no documentation showing the two state tax liens (SOR 
1.o, $39,095 and SOR 1.p, $70,791) have been paid or released. Applicant admitted in 
his SOR answer that he was indebted on the two liens. (Item 2) On six occasions between 
May 2009 and July 2014, various amounts of the tax liens were released. These amounts 
totaled $4,309. (Item 4) In his August 2018 enhanced subject interview, Applicant 
acknowledged he still owed the money for the tax liens. He was attempting to establish a 
repayment plan with the state so that he could start making payments. (Item 4)  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he states he has contacted most of the 
collection companies and has set up repayment schedules or was in the process of 
arranging repayment agreements. (Item A) He intended to pay down the smaller debts 
first and then start to address his tax liens. (Item A)  
Character Information 
 The deputy public works officer has known Applicant for five years and states 
Applicant is a very friendly, cheerful, sincere, enthusiastic, loyal, trustworthy, honest, and 
hardworking person with a positive attitude. (Item B) He believes Applicant is a valued 
employee and his character is above reproach. (Item B) The chief engineer has worked 
with Applicant since January 2011 and states Applicant has a good work ethic, is trusted, 
and supports the goals and priorities of the logistics base. (Item C) The facility security 
officer has known Applicant for three years and states Applicant is an outstanding worker 
and has an outstanding character. (Item D)  
 
4 
 In June 2013, Applicant received a letter of appreciation thanking him for his work 
on restoring the parade field. (Ex. E and Ex. F) The command’s executive deputy stated 
Applicant’s expertise, knowledge, and abilities rendered superb results. (Ex. F) 
 
 Department Counsel expressed concerns in the FORM about Applicant’s failure to 
provide evidence of efforts to resolve the debts, as follows: 
 
He has not provided evidence showing he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances leading to each of his delinquent accounts or unpaid tax 
liens, or showing that he contemporaneously contacted each of his creditors 
as he began to experience financial problems. He has not provided any 
documentary evidence showing that he has paid, is on a current payment 
plan for, or has otherwise resolved any of the delinquent accounts or unpaid 
tax liens alleged in the SOR. (FORM page 2) 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he states he has contacted most of the 
collection companies and has set up repayment schedules or was in the process of 
arranging repayment agreements. (Item A) He intended to pay down the smaller debts 
first and then start to address his tax liens. (Item A) Applicant’s response to the FORM 
contained no documentation showing payment of any of his delinquent obligations. He 
asserted he has contacted the creditors, but provided no documentation as to payment 
on or the current status of his delinquent debts. 
  
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
5 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially overextended is at 
greater risk of having to engage in illegal acts or other questionable acts to 
generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts,” “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required.” The SOR alleged approximately $127,000 in delinquent obligations, 
which he admitted owing in his SOR answer. Applicant has two unpaid state tax liens 
totaling $109,886 and 13 delinquent medical debts totaling more than $17,000. The 
Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and (f). 
 
The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
None of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
apply. Those potentially mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
7 
 In 2003, Applicant started opening restaurants  and investing in real estate and 
spec homes. The economy changed and he lost his investments. His liabilities were more 
than $1.5 million. In 2009, he filed for bankruptcy protection and the majority of his debts 
were discharged. The state tax liens were not discharged, and a lien was placed on 
Applicant’s home. In July 2013, he had emergency treatment for kidney stones resulting 
in the remaining 13 SOR delinquent medical accounts.  
 
 Applicant has known of the Government’s concern about his finances since his 
August 2016 personal interview. During that interview in which each of the delinquent 
accounts were discussed, Applicant stated that his wife took care of the bills, and he had 
no additional pertinent information about the medical debts. He did acknowledge owing 
the two state liens and had made six payments on the tax debt between May 2009 and 
July 2014. Those payments totaled approximately $4,300. He acknowledged he still owed 
the money for the tax liens and was attempting to establish a repayment plan with the 
state so that he could start making payments.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation showing a repayment plan or any payments 
on his state tax liens after July 2014. Nor was there any showing he had recent contact 
with the state taxing authorities or with the medical account creditors. The FORM 
specifically put him on notice that he had failed to provide any documentary evidence 
showing that he has paid, is on a current payment plan for, or has otherwise resolved any 
of the delinquent accounts or unpaid tax liens alleged in the SOR. He asserted he has 
contacted the creditors, but provided no documentation that he has done so. 
 
The unpaid medical obligations are numerous and occurred in 2013. The tax liens 
and medical debts remain unpaid. Medical bills and state taxes are the type of debts that 
are likely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Under AG ¶ 20(b), a business down turn 
contributed to his state tax lien and the emergency treatment for kidney stones was an 
unexpected medical emergency. However, he provided no evidence of what responsible 
steps he took to pay or resolve his debts. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
  
  There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments towards his 
delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a reasonable ongoing 
plan to pay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply since Applicant admits 
the delinquent obligations. AG ¶ 20(f) does not since affluence is not a security concern 
in this case. Applicant asserted he was trying to reach a repayment agreement with the 
state. However, he failed to document an agreement has been reached or payments been 
made in accord with such an arrangement. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Applicant’s duty performance resulted in a letter of appreciation and the deputy 
public works officer, chief engineer, command’s executive deputy, and facility security 
officer are all favorable as to Applicant’s character and work performance.  
 
  Applicant has been employed full time since August 2010. He has been aware of 
the Government’s security concern about his delinquent debts since his August 2016 
interview when he was specifically confronted about his delinquent accounts. Additionally, 
the March 2017 SOR and April 2017 FORM put him on notice of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent accounts. There is no evidence he has contacted his 
creditors. He provided little information regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent 
debt and has failed to present documentation to show he has established repayment 
agreements to address the delinquent debts. Even the six smallest medical debts of $300, 
or less each, remain unpaid.  
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only 
the very limited information in his SOR Answer and in his response to the FORM, financial 
considerations security concerns remain.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to be eligible for a 
security clearance. The determination of an individual’s eligibility and suitability for a 
 
9 
clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both 
disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current 
circumstances, a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid 
his delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan with the medical 
creditors and the state tax authority, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his worthiness for security 
clearance.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. See AG & 2(e). Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
