 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01790 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 13, 
2016. On June 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 9, 2017, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on October 12, 2017. On October 
27, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that 
the hearing was scheduled for November 15, 2017. Applicant requested that the 
hearing be postponed due to his scheduled work-related overseas travel. The hearing 
was cancelled and the case was reassigned to me on November 9, 2017.  
 
On November 13, 2017, DOHA notified Applicant that the hearing was 
rescheduled for December 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as rescheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified but did not call any other witnesses or present any documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open until December 21, 2017, to enable him to submit 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 
20, 2017.  
 
On March 14, 2018, I notified Applicant that two pages appeared to be missing 
from AX D, and I reopened the record to enable him to submit the missing pages. He 
did not submit the missing pages. However, he submitted AX F and G, which were 
untimely but admitted without objection. The email correspondence regarding his post-
hearing submissions is included in the record as an appellate exhibit. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
defense contractors since at least June 2001. He testified that he has been working on 
military ships for 25 years, but he has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 20.) 
 
 Applicant’s SCA reflects that he married in December 2005 and divorced in 
October 2007. His SCA does not list any previous marriages. However, he testified that 
he was married and divorced twice before 1995. (Tr. 20.) He has two sons, ages 25 and 
15. (Tr. 34.)  
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in March 1995 and received a 
discharge in July 1995. (GX 6.) He attributed this bankruptcy to his divorce. His wife left 
him because of his job-related travel, and he was responsible for all the marital debts. 
(Tr. 20.) This bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 Applicant filed another Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in December 2008 and 
received a discharge in April 2009. (GX 5.) He attributed this bankruptcy petition to a 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
failed business partnership. He used personal credit cards to finance the business, and 
found himself heavily in debt when the business failed. (Tr. 21.) This bankruptcy is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 In 2010, Appellant was involved in an altercation. He believed he was a victim 
and was justifiably fighting off an assault, but he was convicted of malicious wounding, a 
felony. As a result, he lost his credentials for access to sensitive areas at his workplace 
for six months. His work hours were reduced from 60-70 hours per week to 40 hours per 
week with no travel and per diem. Applicant’s credentials were restored in 2012. (Tr. 
22.) He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in April 2014. The petition was dismissed 
in July 2015, after Appellant’s pay was reduced again due to decreased overtime, and 
he failed to make the required payments under the bankruptcy plan. (GX 4; Tr. 26.) This 
bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
 Applicant filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in January 2016. The 
bankruptcy petition listed unpaid federal income taxes of $28,145 for tax years 2010-
2013 and $10,717 for tax years 2006-2009. Part of the tax debt was attributable to an 
early withdrawal from a retirement account in 2006. (Tr. 27.) The petition also listed 
$114,527 in nonpriority unsecured debts. (GX 3, Schedules E and F.) His payment plan 
required monthly payments of $2,400 to the bankruptcy trustee. (Tr. 22.) Appellant’s 
bankruptcy attorney advised him to stop making the payments and then refile to obtain 
lower payments. (Tr. 23.) The petition was dismissed in April 2017. This bankruptcy is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 Applicant refiled his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in May 2017. This bankruptcy 
petition is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. This petition listed priority unsecured claims of $6,421 
and nonpriority unsecured claims totaling $127,287. (GX 10 at 1.) The debts listed in the 
bankruptcy petition are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.g.  
 
 The financial statements in Applicant’s most recent Chapter 13 petition reflect 
that his net monthly income is $5,570, his monthly expenses total $3,475, leaving a net 
monthly income of $2,095. His financial statement also recites that he expects to 
receive a $10,000 raise in his annual pay. The basis for his expected pay raise is not 
reflected in the record.  
 
 Applicant’s revised bankruptcy plan was confirmed in July 2017. The plan 
provided for payments of $425 for 3 months, then $1,400 for 6 months, then $2,095 for 
45 months, and finally $2,411 for 6 months. (AX G.) A bankruptcy trustee’s report 
reflected that Applicant paid $425 per month in June, July, and August 2017; and 
$1,400 per month in September, October, and November 2017. The trustee’s report 
reflected payments to Applicant’s attorney, the bankruptcy trustee, and a credit union, 
but no payments to the IRS. (AX D.)  
 
 In December 2017, the bankruptcy trustee moved to dismiss the plan for 
underfunding after the IRS filed a claim. (AX F.) Applicant’s attorney agreed to file a 
modified plan to satisfy the IRS claim. The bankruptcy court set a deadline of February 
 
4 
 
16, 2018, to file a modified plan. The modified plan provides for paying an IRS claim for 
$11,675 in ten monthly installments. (AX G.) The plan was awaiting confirmation when 
the record closed.  
 
 Applicant’s credit report from September 2016 reflected an unreleased federal 
tax lien for $24,305 filed in January 2016; a judgment in favor of a credit union for 
$9,370 filed in December 2014; and a judgment in favor of the same credit union for 
$21,205 filed in November 2014. (GX 8 at 3.) The two unsatisfied judgments are alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.j and 1.k.  
 
Applicant testified that he has never had an account with the credit union, and 
the accounts were opened by his son, who has the same name, but with “Jr.” as a 
suffix. His bankruptcy lawyer disputed the two judgments, and they were deleted from 
his credit record. (Tr. 37.) Applicant’s credit report from April 2017 reflects the federal 
tax lien but does not reflect the two judgments. (GX 7.) His son’s December 2017 credit 
report now reflects the two accounts with this credit union. (AX E.)  
 
 Applicant’s program manager, who has known him for 17 years, submitted a 
letter attesting to Applicant’s skills and leadership. He states that Applicant is highly 
regarded and a role model for his peers and supervisors. (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
 
6 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG 
¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(f) (“failure to file or 
fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant encountered several conditions that 
were largely beyond his control: his marital breakup, the business failure in 2008, and 
his fluctuating pay after his credentials were restored in 2012. His pay reduction after 
his felony conviction in 2010 was not a condition beyond his control, but rather a result 
 
7 
 
of his misconduct. His two Chapter 7 bankruptcies were reasonable measures to attain 
a fresh start after incurring overwhelming debts because of conditions beyond his 
control. His multiple Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings were reasonable means of gaining 
control of his finances, but he has not complied with any of the payment plans, and his 
track record of dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcies raises doubt about whether he will 
comply with the payment plan for his most recent bankruptcy.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established. Financial counseling is a prerequisite for a 
bankruptcy petition, but Applicant’s financial situation is not yet under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant has not yet established a track record of 
adhering to a Chapter 13 payment plan. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the two debts to a credit union alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j 
and 1.k. Applicant articulated a credible basis for disputing the debts and referred the 
problem to his bankruptcy attorney. The debts have been deleted from his credit record 
and were reflected on his son’s credit report from December 2017. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. Applicant included unsecured priority claims for 
federal income taxes in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions, but there is no evidence 
that any payments have been made on his federal income tax debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his history of delinquent debts. 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.j, and 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
