 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 17-00481 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges one delinquent debt for $62,648. 
That debt was resolved through a short sale in 2012. Financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 29, 2016, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF-86). Item 4. On June 26, 2017, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD 
Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel Security Program (PSP), which 
became effective on April 3, 2017, and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing 
in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), which 
became effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017.   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue his access 
to sensitive information, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
                                         
 
whether access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Item 1. Specifically, the SOR set forth trustworthiness concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. Item 1. 
 
In July 14, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not request 
a hearing. Item 3. Department Counsel completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
and on September 29, 2017, the FORM was provided to Applicant. On September 29, 
2017, Applicant responded to the FORM. The nine items attached to the FORM and the 
response to the FORM were admitted into evidence without objection.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant made some admissions in his discussion 
of the debt, and those admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional findings of 
fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 41-years-old, and he has been employed by a DOD contractor as a 
mentor from April 2006 to the present. From September 2002 until present, he was also 
employed as a police lieutenant for a city. In 2008, he received a bachelor’s degree. From 
August 1994 until July 2002, Applicant was in the Navy Reserve and Navy Inactive 
Reserve. He received an honorable discharge. In 2000, he married, and in 2008, he 
divorced. In 2010, he married, and in October 2012, he divorced. He has been cohabitating 
since June 2015. His children were born in 2001 and 2004.   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant traveled overseas for tourism as follows: Japan in January 2010; 
Barbados in October 2011; United Kingdom (U.K.) in March 2012 (his spouse is from the 
U.K.); Ireland in October 2013; Costa Rica in June 2014; and France in June 2015. Item 4. 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a that he has one charged-off debt for $62,648. 
Applicant lived in the same residence from November 2002 to July 2011. Item 4. His home 
was encumbered with a first mortgage for $228,000 and a home equity loan or second 
mortgage for $62,648. In July 2011, Applicant moved, and he rented the home he formerly 
occupied. Applicant had an $800 monthly negative cash flow on the rental property, and in 
March 2012, he separated from his spouse. The next month, he or his spouse filed for 
divorce. The divorce cost Applicant about $50,000. Applicant had financial problems in 
2012 because of the divorce, and he and his spouse needed to reduce expenses.   
 
Applicant and his spouse initially tried to refinance their rental property; however, 
the creditors would not agree to refinance. An attorney advised Applicant and his spouse 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Unless stated otherwise, the 
facts in the statement of facts are from Applicant’s January 29, 2016 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions or SF-86, Applicant’s March 22, 2016 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview, 
and FORM response. Items 4, 8, FORM response.    
 
 
3 
                                         
 
to stop making payments and to short sale the rental property. Applicant and his spouse 
complied with this advice. The first and second mortgages were current until the property 
entered the short-sale process. When the rental property was sold, the first mortgage was 
paid. Item 8 at 4-5. A printout shows in September 2012, Applicant’s residence was sold 
for $232,000, and the first mortgage was $228,000. Item 9. The settlement sheet on the 
real estate transaction is not part of the record evidence. On July 16, 2012, the creditor for 
the second mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.a said “it is in its best interest to accept the offer of 
$11,500 from the closing proceeds as settlement in full and agrees to release its lien . . . .” 
Item 3. Applicant believed that the creditor received $11,500 from the settlement, and the 
debt was resolved. Item 8 at 6.  
 
When Applicant learned the charged-off debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was on his credit report, 
he disputed negative information on his credit report. Item 3. On February 16, 2017, the 
creditor wrote Applicant that the debt dispute was received and “the information in dispute 
has been corrected on the account, and this change has been reported” to the three largest 
credit reporting companies. Item 3.  
 
Applicant’s September 29, 2017 Equifax credit report shows the debt was “paid for 
less than full balance, Paid charge off” and the “Actual Payment Amount” is shown as 
$6,000. FORM Response. Applicant’s most recent credit report is dated August 25, 2017, 
and it indicates the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a has provided two loans to Applicant for $17,931 
and $12,831 with both loans indicating paid and closed. Item 7. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is 
not shown in the most recent credit report of record. His most recent credit report shows 
multiple debts, which are all current. Item 7.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to classified information applies 
similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified information. As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security 
or other sensitive information and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently 
trustworthy to have access to such information. See Id. at 527. 
  
Positions formerly designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as noncritical-
sensitive positions and include those personnel “[w]ith access to automated systems that 
contain military active duty, guard, or reservists’ personally identifiable information or 
information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise protected from disclosure by 
DOD 5400.11-R where such access has the potential to cause serious damage to the 
national security.” DOD Manual 5200.02 ¶ 4.1a(3)(c).   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
 
4 
                                         
 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein 
and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to sensitive 
information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
 
5 
                                         
 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” The evidence of record establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue; 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents 
evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant 
to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard 
applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. 
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
 
6 
                                         
 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, 
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by divorce and the decline in real 
estate fair market values from 2009 to 2012. He had a negative cash flow on a rental 
property, and his attorney advised him to stop making payments on the two mortgages 
encumbering the rental property and to divest himself from the property through a short 
sale. The creditor for the second mortgage was amenable to a short sale, even though the 
creditor would only receive about 20 percent of the debt. Real estate in the state where the 
rental property was located declined drastically in market value around 2009. The property 
was sold through a short sale, and the first mortgage was paid. The second-mortgage 
creditor only received $6,000 on a $62,648 debt. In 2012, the creditor accepted the $6,000 
as payment of the debt and released a second-mortgage lien on the property. The debt is 
resolved.  AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply.  
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments of his non-SOR debts showed 
good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and to continue 
making progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will 
conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient 
to mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity 
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a public trust 
position “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant is 41-years-old, and he has been employed by a DOD contractor as a 
mentor from April 2006 to the present. From September 2002 until January 2016, he was 
also employed as a police lieutenant for a city. In 2008, he received a bachelor’s degree. 
From August 1994 until July 2002, Applicant was in the Navy Reserve and Navy Inactive 
Reserve. He received an honorable discharge. In 2010, he married, and in October 2012, 
he divorced. His children were born in 2001 and 2004.   
 
In 2012, the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved through a short sale. Applicant’s credit 
report does not reflect any balances past due on any debts. All of his debts are in current 
status. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate 
that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) 
(Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.) There 
is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). He understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial circumstances to 
address his delinquent debts. Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
DOD Manual 5200.02, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole person. I conclude that financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated. It is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for public trust position. 
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
