 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-01588 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct), G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant was convicted 
twice of operating a vehicle after consuming alcohol, and is still on probation for his most 
recent arrest. Additionally, he was involved in two alcohol-related domestic violence 
incidents. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 4, 2014. On July 
31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guidelines J, G, and E. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all 
decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 11, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. On October 13, 2017, a complete copy of the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was mailed to Applicant and received by him on 
October 18, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s Items. Hence, Items 
1 through 8 are admitted into evidence without objection. He submitted additional 
evidence, which was admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. The case 
was assigned to me on February 12, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his 
employment as a federal contractor. He was worked as a senior system engineer since 
May 2013. He has never been married and has a six-year-old son. Applicant received his 
associate’s degree in 2003, finished his undergraduate degree in May 2016, and is 
working toward a master’s degree.  
 
The SOR contains three allegations under Guideline J for criminal activity that 
occurred between 2009 and 2016 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c), all of which were cross-
alleged under Guideline G (SOR ¶ 2.a.) and Guideline E (SOR ¶ 3.a.). After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 In August 2009, Applicant was charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI) and 
Failure to Obey a Traffic Control Device (SOR ¶ 1.a.). While at a house party, Applicant 
consumed two to three beers over the course of eight hours. When he left the party, 
driving his own vehicle, he did not think he was over the legal limit or too impaired to drive. 
When he was pulled over by a police officer, he passed the field sobriety tests, but 
because he admitted to consuming alcohol, the police requested he take a breathalyzer 
test. He does not recall the results of this test. Applicant pleaded guilty to Driving While 
Impaired (DWI) by Alcohol and was placed on probation before judgment. He paid a fine 
and court costs, and completed alcohol education classes (Item 4 at 18-19 and Item 5).2 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to the underlying conduct (Item 2). 
 
In November 2011, a one-year Domestic Violence Protective Order was issued 
against Applicant. This order was issued on behalf of the mother of Applicant’s son, his 
former girlfriend (SOR ¶ 1.b.). On November 11, 2011, Applicant pushed and hit her with 
their son’s car seat, bruising her leg. A week later, while she was holding their four-month-
old-son, he approached them in a drunken stupor, took the baby, ran to his car, and put 
the baby in the car without a car seat (Item 6 at 13). He also threw two beer bottles at her. 
The judge found that there were reasonable grounds to believe this information and 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security application (Item 3) unless otherwise 
indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 Applicant was originally interviewed on October 9, 2014. He told the investigator that he has not driven 
after drinking since his August 2009 arrest and there is no likelihood of recurrence (Item 4 at 19). 
 
 3
granted Applicant’s former girlfriend a one-year Protective Order (Item 6 at 5). Applicant 
admitted that a Protective Order was issued against him, but denied he assaulted his 
former girlfriend or consumed alcohol. 
 
During a December 6, 2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
disclosed he was arrested after an incident in June 2016, in which he choked, struck, and 
digitally penetrated his former girlfriend. She asserted he was intoxicated and on drugs 
when the incident occurred. Applicant denied he assaulted his former girlfriend or 
consumed alcohol or drugs. He went to a jury trial in October 2016. (Item 4 at 13-14).3  
 
In November 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI of Alcohol Per 
Se. Applicant was at a lounge attending a friend’s birthday party where he consumed 
approximately three alcoholic beverages. When he left the lounge, he did not feel 
intoxicated, and he drove his personal vehicle. A police officer pulled him over as he 
entered a restaurant’s drive-thru. Applicant performed a field sobriety test and was 
requested to go to the police station for a breathalyzer. He tested over the legal limit, but 
cannot remember his blood alcohol content (Item 4 at 12-13). Applicant pled guilty and 
was sentenced, in part, to two years of probation, ending on March 6, 2019 (SOR ¶ 1.c.). 
Applicant admitted this allegation and provided evidence that in March 2017, he 
completed a substance abuse class (Item 2 at 4).  
 
 As of August 2016, Applicant stated that he consumes two to three beers a year, 
while attending social events (Item 4 at 14). He claims he has no intention of drinking and 
driving again (Item 4 at 13). 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”4 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”5 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”6 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
                                                          
3 The SOR did not allege this derogatory information as an allegation. Hence, it will not be analyzed as a 
potential disqualifying condition, but may be considered under the analysis of mitigating conditions and the 
whole-person concept, in addition to an evaluation of Applicant’s credibility. 
 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 Egan at 527. 
 
6 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
 4
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”7 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”9 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.10 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.12 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”13 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”14 
                                                          
7 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant’s history of criminal activity between 2009 and 2016 and his current 
parole status establishes the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised in this 
case. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant was 28 years old when he was first arrested for DWI and was 
subsequently convicted. Two years later, he was issued a Domestic Violence Protective 
Order after he assaulted the mother of his son. He consumed alcohol prior to that incident. 
In October 2016, he went to trial for a second alcohol-related physical altercation. In 
                                                          
 
 
 6
November 2016, he was arrested for a second DUI. One year ago, he was convicted and 
sentenced to two years of probation for that DUI. His probation is not set to expire until 
March 2019.  
 
 The three alleged alcohol-related incidents collectively establish a pattern of 
questionable judgment that calls into question Applicant’s ability or willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations. After completing his SCA in 2014, at age 33, Applicant 
was arrested again; despite telling the government investigator that he did not intend to 
drive after consuming alcohol. Based on all the evidence, Applicant has not demonstrated 
a sufficient pattern of modified behavior to conclude that his questionable judgment 
associated with past criminal misconduct is behind him or that he has provided sufficient 
evidence of rehabilitation. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are not established. 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
 Applicant admitted to consuming alcohol before his 2009 and 2016 arrests. He 
denied the underlying behavior which led to the issuance of a Protective Order and that 
alcohol was involved in this incident. Applicant’s denials are not credible.  
  
 After the Government raised potentially disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted 
to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 23 
provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline. 
Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 7
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Within a seven-year period, Applicant was charged twice with crimes involving 
alcohol and driving. Not enough time has passed since the last offense in November 
2016, nor has any of the conduct occurred under unusual conditions. AG ¶ 23(a) does 
not apply. Applicant acknowledged he consumed alcohol and drove, but he has not 
provided sufficient evidence of steps he has taken to prevent similar incidents. Despite 
his claim to be more vigilant after his first arrest, he failed to do so. AG ¶ 23(b) does not 
apply. There is no evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(d). Although he 
participated in alcohol education classes, he has not participated in counseling or a 
treatment program as prescribed in the mitigating conditions. Additionally, the 
documentation he submitted regarding the completion of his second alcohol class, does 
not contain treatment recommendations. 
   
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s criminal conduct as a concern under Guideline 
E. As explained previously, such conduct calls into question Applicant’s judgment and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. His conduct also establishes 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(c).15 I have considered all the mitigating conditions under 
Guideline E and, for similar reasons explained under Guidelines J and G, find that none 
apply.  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                          
15 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that . . . when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 
 8
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J, G, and E in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J, G, and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his criminal and alcohol related conduct. Accordingly, Applicant has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security 
interests of the United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Caroline E. Heintzelman 
Administrative Judge 
