 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-00820 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not produce sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by the Government’s adverse information about his financial problems. 
Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 15, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for 
Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 
On June 1, 2017, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 At the 
time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision 
in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On August 10, 2017, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 15, 2017, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not submit any 
additional information and the record closed on September 14, 2017. I received this 
case on January 16, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to 
file, as required, his federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2012 (SOR 
1.a); and that he owes $5,054 for four delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.b – 1.e), 
one of which (SOR 1.b) is a $2,920 delinquent tax debt for the 2013 tax year. Applicant 
admitted all of the SOR allegations. (FORM, Items 1 and 2)  
 
 Applicant disclosed in his e-QIP that he filed his 2011 tax return late and owed 
$1,800. During a subject interview on October 20, 2016, he provided information that 
showed he did not file his returns for the years addressed in SOR 1.a and that he owed 
the delinquent tax debt alleged in SOR 1.b. A May 2016 credit report provided by the 
Government documents the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. (FORM, Items 3 – 5). 
Applicant has not paid or otherwise acted to resolve his debts and has not filed his past-
due tax returns. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since March 2016. He has worked steadily for several different employers since 
at least April 2004. Applicant served in the military between November 1989 and 
December 1993. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 5). 
5 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information. A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
 
                                                 
6 See Directive, 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Available information about Applicant’s finances reasonably raises a security 
concern under Guideline F, expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR and in his subject interview, as well as the 
information contained in a 2016 credit report, require application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required). In response to the Government’s information, Applicant did not provide any 
information, on which application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 might be 
based. The security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Available information is not 
sufficient to resolve the doubts raised by the Government’s information about 
Applicant’s suitability for clearance. Because protection of the national interest is the 
principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against 
the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
