 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 17-00684 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronics Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 10, 2016. On May 3, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 19, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. On January 18, 2018, a complete copy of the Government’s 
written case, including a file of relevant material (FORM) and documents identified as 
Items 1 through 10, was sent to Applicant. He was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on February 6, 2018, and did not respond. Item 1 contains the 
pleadings in the case. Items 2 through 10 are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on March 27, 2018. 
 
2 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG, as required.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, 
because they were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision 
would have been the same under the earlier version. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 In the FORM, the Government amended the SOR to add additional Guideline F 
allegations under paragraph 1, as follows: 
 
k. You filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in or around March 2017. In or around 
July 2017, your dischargeable debts were discharged. 
 
l. You are indebted to the IRS for delinquent taxes in the approximate 
amount of $3,416.00 for tax year 2009. As of the date of this Statement of 
Reasons, the taxes remain unpaid. 
 
m. You are indebted to [a local government] for delinquent taxes in the 
approximate amount of $3,815.00 for tax year 2013. As of the date of this 
Statement of Reasons, the taxes remain unpaid. 
 
 Each of the amended allegations are supported by record evidence.3 Because 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM, I conclude that he has waived any objection to 
the Government’s SOR amendment.  
 
I sua sponte amended the SOR to correct apparent typographical errors with 
respect to the characterization of this case as an ISCR case rather than as an ADP case. 
As drafted, the SOR references an ISCR case number, refers to Applicant as an 
“Applicant for Security Clearance,” and contains ISCR language in the initial paragraph 
of the body of the SOR.  
 
The header of the SOR has been amended to “ADP Case No. 17-00684” and to 
refer to Applicant as an “Applicant for Public Trust Position.” The initial paragraph of the 
body of the SOR has been amended to reflect the following language required of an ADP 
case: 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD 4), establishing a “single, 
common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD 4 ¶ B, Purpose). The SEAD 4 
became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD 4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The new AG, which are found at Appendix 
A to SEAD 4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to classified national security 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. (SEAD 4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (decisions must be based on current DOD policy 
and standards). 
 
3 Items 9 and 10. 
 
 
3 
 
A review of your eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III to support a Department of Defense (DoD) 
contract has been made pursuant to DoD Directive 5220.6, dated, January 
2, 1992, (as amended). Because this office is unable to conclude that you 
are eligible to occupy such a position, your case will be submitted to an 
Administrative Judge for a determination as to whether or not to grant, deny, 
or revoke your eligibility. This determination is based on the following 
reasons: 
 
Because these sua sponte amendments are not substantive in nature and have 
not affected my decision, prior notice to the parties is not required. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He has never been married and has no children. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2014. Applicant honorably served in the U.S. Army from 
1982 through 1991. Although the record is not clear, I assume that Applicant has 
remained employed full time since October 2015 either by the employer listed on his e-
QIP, or by the entity of a different name that is noted as his public-trust application 
sponsor. 
 
The SOR alleged the following: 
 
 Two Chapter 7 bankruptcies, both of which resulted in discharges of 
Applicant’s dischargeable debts, one in 1996 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and the 
other in 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.k); 
 
 Two Chapter 13 bankruptcies, one of which resulted in a discharge 
of Applicant’s dischargeable debts in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and the other 
which was dismissed for failure to make plan payments in 2009 (SOR 
¶ 1.c);  
 
 Three income tax debts, including $9,932 owed to IRS for tax years 
2004 through 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d); $3,416 owed to IRS for tax year 
2009 (SOR ¶ 1.l); and $3,815 owed to a local government for tax 
year 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.m);  
  
                                                          
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from Applicant’s 
SOR answer (Item 1), his e-QIP (Item 2), and the summaries of his 2016 subject interview (Item 3). I 
considered that Item 3 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, Applicant was 
informed by Department Counsel that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, and updates 
to Item 3. He was also informed that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 3 on the ground that 
it was not authenticated. Because Applicant did not respond to the FORM, I conclude that he has waived 
any objection to Item 3. ISCR Case No. 14-06781 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016). 
 
 
4 
 
 A mortgage account past due in the amount of $128,226 and in 
foreclosure status with a total loan balance of $215,104 (SOR ¶ 1.e); 
and 
 
 Five collection accounts totaling debt $4,719 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 
1.j).  
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. He denied, without 
explanation, the debts alleged in ¶¶ SOR 1.e through 1.j. Because he did not answer the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.m, they are denied. The denied allegations are 
established by record evidence.5 
 
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized DOD investigator about his e-QIP in 
2016. During that interview, he attributed his failure to timely file and pay taxes and his 
financial indebtedness to medical problems he began experiencing in 2009 and also to 
inconsistent employment. He described his financial status at the time as poor. Applicant 
retired from 20 years of federal-government employment in January 2013. He was 
unemployed from January 2013 through November 2014. From February 2013 through 
May 2014, he was a full-time student. In November 2014, he began an internship program 
with an employer that he expected would eventually hire him for a full-time position. After 
four months, the internship ended and he was not hired full time. He was then unemployed 
for six months until October 2015 when he resumed full-time employment. During the 
periods of his unemployment, he relied upon his retirement income, a school stipend, and 
federal and state government funds (type unspecified). He did not specify the amounts of 
these income sources.6 
 
The record is silent as to specific details about Applicant’s relevant income and 
expense history and about any particulars concerning the financial impact that his past or 
present circumstances have had on his ability to pay his delinquent debts. The record is 
also silent as to whether he has sought out or received any credit counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.7  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a DOD 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
                                                          
5 Items 3 through 10. 
 
6 Items 2 and 3. 
 
7 Directive, § 3.2.  
 
 
5 
 
in the AG.8 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government establishes a 
disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.9 The protection of the 
national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 
                                                          
8 Directive, Enclosure 2.  
 
9 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15. 
 
 
6 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting sensitive 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence establish three disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, 
or local income tax as required). 
 
 Because bankruptcy is an acceptable form of debt resolution, the concern is not 
with the bankruptcies themselves, but with underlying history of financial indebtedness 
surrounding them. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to fully establish any of 
the potentially applicable mitigating factors.10 Therefore, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his financial indebtedness and his failure 
to timely pay federal and local income taxes. I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d).11 Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant him eligibility for a 
public trust position. 
 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 20 (a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 20 (b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); AG ¶ 20 (c) (the individual has 
received or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as 
a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control); AG ¶ 20 (d) (the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); AG ¶ 20 (e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue); and AG ¶ 20 (g) 
(the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed 
and is in compliance with those arrangements). 
 
11 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the amended SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
