 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01919 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on August 27 2017, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on September 20, 2017. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 9, 2017. He 
responded to the FORM with letters and documents that I have marked Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through C. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018. The 
 
2 
 
Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A through C are admitted in 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1998. He has an associate’s degree. He is married with two 
children in college.1 
  
 Applicant’s children attended private school, and he overextended himself 
financially. He stopped paying a credit card in about 2012. The credit card company 
obtained a $25,446 judgment against him in April 2016. He stated in his background 
interview that the creditor used the judgment to seize the money in his bank account, 
which was less than $2,000. He did not provide any additional information or 
corroborating documentation. In October 2017, he sent a letter to the creditor offering to 
pay $250 per month. He stated that his financial situation will improve in about a year, 
and he will increase the payments.2 
 
 Applicant filed his federal income tax returns for the 2014 and 2015 tax years, but 
he did not pay all his federal taxes due. He estimated that he owed $600 for 2014 and 
$2,000 for 2015. The IRS indicated that as of October 2017, he owed $3,030 for 2014. 
He paid the IRS $3,030 in October 2017. His 2014 federal income taxes are paid. He 
did not provide any evidence of the status of his 2015 federal income taxes.3 
 
 Applicant’s state of residence filed a $1,261 tax lien against him in 2012. He 
denied owing this debt and stated it was paid. He provided documentation that the lien 
was cancelled in March 2017.4 
 
 Applicant listed his financial problems on his October 2016 Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), and he discussed them during his background 
interview in March 2017. He stated in his response to the FORM that his wife recently 
returned to work after being on medical leave. He stated that going through the security 
clearance process “has been eye opening,” and that he “now understand[s] how to 
better maintain [his] financial obligation[s].”5 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 Items 1-4; AE A. 
 
3 Items 1-3; AE B, C. 
 
4 Items 1, 4. 
 
5 Items 2, 3; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems, including a judgment for an unpaid 
credit card and unpaid taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges the underlying credit card debt that resulted in the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005). SOR ¶ 1.c is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant sent his children to private school, and he overextended himself 
financially. That was not beyond his control. His wife’s medical problems were beyond 
his control, but they appear to post-date his financial problems.  
 
Applicant paid his 2014 federal income taxes in October 2017, after he received 
the SOR. He did not provide any evidence of the status of his 2015 federal income 
taxes. The state tax lien was cancelled in March 2017. He sent a letter to the judgment 
holder offering to pay $250 per month. He stated that his financial situation will improve 
in about a year, and he will increase the payments. Intentions to pay debts in the future 
are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible 
approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) are applicable to 
the state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b) and Applicant’s 2014 federal taxes (SOR ¶ 1.d). They are 
not applicable to the unpaid judgment and the 2015 federal taxes. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s long work 
history with the same company and his honesty about his finances throughout the 
process. He may reach the point where his finances are sufficiently stable to warrant a 
security clearance, but he has not established that he is there yet. I am obligated to 
resolve any doubt in favor of the national security.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
