 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00560 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
March 6, 2018 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a long history of unresolved tax debts and delinquent accounts. 
Additionally Applicant falsified her 2016 e-QIP. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, national 
security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On January 27, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 11, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F: Financial 
Considerations and E: Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 6, 2017 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on August 14, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on August 14, 2017, setting the hearing for September 28, 2017, per 
Applicant’s request. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 14 into evidence, and they were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and presented six Applicant Exhibits (AE), marked AE A 
through AE F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on October 13, 2017. The record was left open for the submission of 
additional documentation. On October 19, 2017, Applicant submitted exhibits, which I 
marked as AE G through M. Department Counsel had no objections to AE G through M, 
and they were admitted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 2.b. 
She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 2.a. (Answer.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in 
the findings below.  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. She has been employed with a Government contractor 
for 15 years. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2012. She served in the Navy from 
1986 to 1989, and received an honorable discharge. She achieved the rate of E-3. She 
has been divorced twice; in 1993 and 2006. She has three children, ages 27, 17, and 
15. She also has custody of her 8-year-old granddaughter. She attributed her delinquent 
debt to her divorce and her ex-husband’s failed contracting business. She also testified 
that, since her second divorce, she has had difficulties resolving her debts because she 
is a single mother on a limited income. (GE 1; Tr. 25-31, 49-50, 59.) 
  
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2016. She reported liabilities 
of $129,970, with assets totaling less than $23,497. Her debts listed in the Chapter 13 
include a vehicle that was voluntarily repossessed; student loans; multiple collection 
accounts; delinquent credit card accounts; and tax debt. She chose to file Chapter 13 
because she wanted to repay what she owed. She pays $1,297 monthly to the trustee, 
who then distributes the funds to the creditors. Her payments began in May 2017 and 
 
 
 
 
3 
are scheduled to continue for five years. She is current on her payments to the trustee, 
but she admitted to missing one payment. (GE 8; GE 9; AE A; AE B; Tr. 43-46, 53-55, 
88.) 
 
 Applicant’s wages were garnished by her state taxation authority in May 2015 in 
the amount of $7,449 for unpaid taxes from 2012 and 2013. Applicant testified that she 
did not recall the reason for the garnishment. She claimed, “I’ve always filed my taxes 
every year.” (Tr. 35.) However, she was going to school at the time and “probably didn’t 
have the funding to pay it all at once.” (Tr. 35.) She believed she made payment 
arrangements, but fell behind on them, resulting in the involuntary garnishment. The 
garnishment order was terminated in March 2016, after Applicant’s debt was fully 
resolved. Zero balances for tax years 2012 and 2013 are reflected in documentation 
from her state. (AE J.) However, it also reflects Applicant currently owes $1,249.45 to 
her state’s taxation authority for tax years 2015 and 2016. (AE C; AE J; AE L; Tr. 34-
37.) 
 
 Applicant’s wages were garnished by her local sheriff’s department in 2009 in the 
amount of $3,328. This was for a judgment against her, although Applicant was unable 
to identify the original creditor. The garnishment was fully resolved after repayment in 
July 2010, as established in a statement provided into evidence. (AE D; AE E; Tr. 38-
41.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the amount of 
$6,194 for tax years 2009, and 2012 through 2015. (AE M.) She provided account 
transcripts that showed she often filed her Federal tax returns late, but that each year 
had been filed. As of October 2017, she owed: $1,998.83 for 2015; $400.16 for 2014; 
$1,345.55 for 2013; $655.94 for 2012; and $566 for 2009. (AE M.) Applicant explained 
that she usually owes taxes when she files her income tax returns. She made 
installment agreements with the IRS and would try to make payments when she could, 
but often missed those payments. (AE M; Tr. 87.) She has not sought advice from a tax 
professional on how to avoid this problem in the future. Her past-due taxes are included 
in her Chapter 13 plan. (GE 7; AE F; Tr. 41-43, 47.) Her documentation from the IRS 
reflects an additional debt of $1,823.01 for tax year 2016. (AE K.) 
 
 Applicant testified she has participated in financial counseling twice. She 
completed an on-line financial course in September 2016 related to the bankruptcy 
petition requirements. (AE I; Tr. 62-63.) She had also completed another course 
“previously.” (Tr. 62.) She intends to continue repaying her debts through the Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. (Tr. 63.) She also intends to downsize, as her children grow up. (Tr. 66.) 
Her budget reflects she has little left over after her Chapter 13 payment and monthly 
bills are paid. (GE 7; Tr. 74-75.) She sometimes takes payday loans to help her make 
ends meet. (Tr. 86-87.) 
 
 On her January 27, 2016 e-QIP, Applicant responded “no” to the question in 
Section 26 - Financial Record, which asked if she had failed to file or pay Federal, state, 
or other taxes, as required by law. Applicant’s answer was false. Additionally, she 
 
 
 
 
4 
denied having and failed to disclose any of her other delinquent debt on her e-QIP 
under Section 26. Applicant testified: 
 
I was just going through my form, filling it out, and honestly as I was 
saying when we first opened, it's a lot for me right now and when I'm going 
through my form and I'm answering stuff, checking boxes, I either wasn't 
paying attention to the question or I was trying to just complete in a hurry 
is my honest answer. (Tr. 78.) 
 
However, when she was interviewed in August 2016 by an agent of the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), she was given the opportunity to correct her e-QIP 
answers about her financial history, prior to being confronted about her delinquent debt. 
She did not disclose her debts to her investigator, before being confronted with the 
credit report that the agent shared with her. (Tr. 79.) She testified: 
 
I knew that there was taxes, but I knew that I was taking care of my 
business, you know? That I was trying to find ways to pay whatever debts 
I had or any taxes. I've always been like on a payment plan, so I've never 
just not paid my taxes or not filed my taxes. So I was being honest. I've 
always filed and I've always paid. Maybe not up to date, but I paid, you 
know. (Tr. 80.) 
 
 Applicant presented one letter of recommendation from her supervisor. He noted 
that Applicant performs her job with integrity and conducts herself professionally. (AE 
G.) Applicant’s performance reviews reflect she is a successful performer. (AE H.) She 
has completed web-based training courses required for her job. (AE H.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
 
 
5 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
As alleged in the SOR, Applicant has a long history of not meeting her financial 
obligations. Her SOR-alleged debt extends as far back as 2009 and remains largely 
unresolved. While two of her delinquent accounts have been resolved involuntarily 
through garnishment, she has not resolved her Federal tax debt. Additionally, she has 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy to resolve her Federal tax debt and other financial 
liabilities totaling 129,971. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. She has a long history of 
delinquencies that continue to date. She has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant attributed her recent delinquencies to her 2006 divorce and her status 
as a single mother. These may be circumstances beyond her control. However, she 
failed to establish that she acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to her debts in 
a timely manner while they were accruing. However, she has recently acted responsibly 
by filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and has made payments under that plan. Partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has been established. 
 
 Applicant has completed the financial counseling required to file Chapter 13 
bankruptcy and reported that she attended another course in the past. However, there 
are no clear indications that her financial counseling was effective or that her financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. Her budget reflects she has little 
money left over after making her bankruptcy payments and paying her living expenses. 
Further, she continues to take pay-day loans to make ends meet when funds are short. 
While Applicant has successfully made payments on her Chapter 13 plan, she admitted 
to missing one payment. It is too soon to tell whether Applicant will be able to maintain 
the repayment plan for five years. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d) has not been 
established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is inapplicable to this case. Applicant failed to demonstrate 
compliance with any payment arrangements. Further, each year she continues to incur 
more tax debt. Until she changes her financial practices with respect to her income tax 
obligations, she will continue to have financial difficulties. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information or sensitive information. Of special interest is any 
failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be applicable:  
 
(a) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant was aware she was required to disclose her delinquent debt and 
unpaid tax obligations when she completed and certified the truth of her answers on her 
e-QIP. Her explanation to have rushed through the forms and missed the questions was 
not credible. She had completed the e-QIP for past clearances and knew she had to 
disclose financial delinquencies. There is sufficient evidence to raise this disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 16.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s personal conduct. I have considered the following potentially 
applicable mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(d) the individual acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant’s efforts to correct her omissions were neither prompt nor done in good 
faith. She waited until she was confronted by the OPM agent with her credit report to 
disclose any of her delinquent debts. Applicant’s omissions were deliberate attempts to 
conceal serious financial issues, and cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. There is insufficient evidence to raise mitigation under AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
Applicant failed to present evidence of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(c) or 17(d). She 
did not acknowledge intentionally deceiving the Government on her 2016 e-QIP, despite 
extensive knowledge of her delinquent taxes and other debts. Falsifying information is a 
serious offense and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment 
are unlikely to occur. Further, she failed to take responsibility for her actions. She has 
not provided information in this record to show that she has met her burden of proof to 
mitigate her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for her choices to incur substantial debt and not repay it. She has 
not demonstrated a history of responsible action at this time. Her finances are not yet 
under control, despite beginning to manage her debts through the recent Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition. A determination cannot be made that financial problems are 
unlikely to continue and recur. Further, she was not forthright with the Government 
about her debts on her 2016 e-QIP. Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She failed to 
meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
