 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01362 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 3, 2016. On 
July 31, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E.1 Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on September 22, 2017. 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 12, 2017, but did not submit 
a response. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 8) are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old shift lead employed by a defense contractor since 2014. 
He graduated from high school in 1979 and attended college. He has been married since 
1999. He was previously married in 1998 and divorced in 1999. He has two children and 
has not previously held a DOD security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant incurred fifteen delinquent debts, totaling $51,581, 
including three federal tax liens totaling $49,602, and twelve debts of which the majority 
are from medical providers. In addition, the SOR alleges Applicant has a history of 
consuming alcohol to intoxication; three alcohol-related arrests in 2013, 2012, and 1991; 
resigning from a job in lieu of being fired in 2014; using cocaine from 1981 to 2008; failing 
a random drug test in 2008; using marijuana from 1981 to 2007; an arrest for felony 
possession of marijuana and cocaine with intent to sell; and a 1985 arrest for assault with 
a deadly weapon on a law enforcement officer. Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations, except he denied a small debt detailed in SOR ¶ 1.e, which 
he claimed to have paid. However, his credit report shows the debt was charged off and 
therefore remains unresolved. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated his intent to consolidate his medical 
debts and negotiate a resolution. Applicant also stated that he relied on a family member 
to file tax returns, but they were not filed when due. He was contacted by the IRS and 
filed the delinquent returns, but liens were filed against him for unpaid taxes. Applicant 
noted his delinquent taxes will be paid by garnishment of his pay and withholding of any 
refunds. He also admitted to “consuming alcohol,” and the other criminal offenses and 
employment actions. He noted that he entered voluntary treatment as a result of his 2013 
driving under the influence (DUI) arrest, and stated that the program helped him change 
his lifestyle and was a “powerful lesson.” He admitted to having “done some things in my 
past that were not good. I have grown with age and realized this type of behavior will 
destroy my life. I have a happy family and love myself and my country.”  
 
No documentary evidence of his change in lifestyle, counseling, tax status, 
payments on taxes or medical debts, or current financial status was submitted. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
3 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence supporting the SOR 
allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions. I reviewed the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20. None fully apply to this case. 
 
Applicant has not provided satisfactory evidence establishing an inability to pay 
debts or pay federal taxes when due. He has not shown sufficient evidence of actions 
taken to resolve his taxes or other debts. Applicant’s financial history raises serious 
questions about his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
   
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶16 are: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issues areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
 
5 
 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
  Applicant’s history of criminal conduct and alcohol and illegal drug abuse as noted 
in the findings of fact, invokes an assessment of questionable judgment and personal 
conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) 
and (e) apply. SOR ¶ 2.c alleges the same conduct as alleged in ¶ 2.a, and SOR ¶ 2.g 
alleges the same conduct as alleged in ¶ 2.f. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Applicant’s criminal history and acknowledged alcohol and drug abuse, taken as a 
whole, show a pattern of unmitigated misconduct. Based on the totality of the allegations 
and recurring inappropriate conduct up to 2014, I find Applicant’s judgment continues to 
be questionable. He has not submitted sufficient evidence to alleviate those concerns. 
The allegations are not minor, nor did they occur in unique circumstances where they are 
not likely to recur. Although he received counseling as a result of his 2013 DUI arrest, he 
has not convinced me that continued criminal behavior or alcohol or drug abuse have 
ceased and are unlikely to recur in the future. I find no mitigating condition is fully 
applicable. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has 
not shown sufficient effort to resolve his debts or that his personal conduct issues are 
behind him and under control. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b; 2.d-2.f; 2.h-2.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
