 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  17-03774 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 11, 2017. On 
November 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On February 8, 2018, the Government sent a complete 
copy of its written case, a file of relevant material (FORM) including documents 
identified as Items 1 through 7, to Applicant. He was given an opportunity to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation to the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on February 13, 
 
2 
 
2018, and timely submitted his response, to which the Government did not object. Items 
1 and 2 are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 7 are admitted into evidence. 
The two documents attached to Applicant’s FORM response are admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant, age 35, has seven minor children between the ages of 2 and 16. He 
has never married. He has cohabited with his girlfriend since 2017. Applicant earned a 
certificate of completion for technical-college courses that he took in 2008, 2009, and 
2015. Since July 2016, he has been employed as an assembly mechanic by the same 
defense contractor who previously employed him from October 2015 until January 
2016. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
 
The SOR, under Guideline F, alleged 14 debts totaling $77,023, including a 
$51,710 child support debt, and six student loan debts totaling $19,018. Under 
Guideline E, the SOR alleged six arrests that occurred between 2010 and 2015, 
including a DUI (2012), three driving while license suspended (2010, 2012, and 2014), a 
failure to appear (2013), two driving while a habitual violator (2013 and 2015), and 2014 
charges for an interlock violation and failure to maintain liability insurance. In his SOR 
answer, Applicant admitted to each Guideline F and E allegation without explanation.2  
 
In Applicant’s FORM response, he claimed that he resolved “multiple delinquent 
accounts,” including accounts not alleged in the SOR. He averred, without providing any 
corroborating documents, that he negotiated a payment arrangement to resolve the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (a $1,947 medical account). In addition, without providing 
any corroborating documents, he claimed that he is paying the child support debt (SOR 
¶ 1.h) via wage garnishment and that he reduced the balance to $51,129. Applicant 
provided documentation showing that he resolved only two of the 14 debts alleged:  
SOR ¶ 1.j (a $304 water account)3 and SOR ¶ 1.n (a $136 energy account).4  
 
Applicant attributed his financial indebtedness to his “high” child support payment 
and to periods of unemployment. Since 2008, he has been unemployed six times. After 
he was laid off in December 2008, Applicant remained unemployed until August 2009. 
After an argument with his supervisor, he quit his job in January 2010. He remained 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his 2017 security clearance 
interview (Item 7). Item 7 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, Applicant 
was informed by the Government that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
updates to Item 7. Applicant was also informed that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 7 on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did neither in his response to the FORM. Therefore, I 
conclude that he has waived any objection to Item 7. 
 
2 Items 4 and 5. 
 
3 AE B. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
unemployed until January 2011. After being fired for misusing an employee discount in 
April 2012, he immediately found employment, where he remained until he was laid off 
in September 2012. He remained unemployed until March 2013. In August 2013, he quit 
his job due to his mother passing away and remained unemployed until September 
2014. He then worked continuously until May 2015, when he quit to pursue other job 
opportunities. He remained unemployed until October 2015. After he was laid off again 
in January 2016, he remained unemployed until June 2016. Since then, he has been 
employed continuously. 
 
During Applicant’s August 2017 security clearance interview, he disclosed that he 
was expecting a worker’s compensation settlement (amount not specified) within the 
next three months. He anticipated that he would use the proceeds to settle his debts. 
The record is silent as to the status of that settlement.  
 
Applicant claimed that he was not aware that his license had been suspended 
due to an unpaid traffic ticket prior to his 2010 arrest. He averred that he had only a “few 
drinks” and thought he was fine to drive prior to his 2012 arrest. The court sentenced 
him to six months in jail (all but two days suspended), placed him on probation for one 
year, suspended his license for an unspecified period, and ordered him to install an 
interlock device on his vehicle. Applicant admitted that he knowingly drove on a 
suspended license in 2014 because he had to “get somewhere.” He did not have 
insurance at the time or have his interlock device installed because he did not want to 
pay for it since he was not driving (except for that one instance) while his license was 
suspended. For the 2014 violations, the court extended his probation for another six 
months. He was also arrested in 2014 for child support violations (not alleged).5 He 
believed that the failure to appear charge was related to child support. In Applicant’s 
FORM response, he stated that he has not been arrested since January 2015, and that 
he has maintained a valid driver’s license since January 2018.6 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”7 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”8 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”9 
 
                                                          
5 Because this arrest was not alleged, I will consider it only to evaluate mitigation and whole person. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
8 Egan at 527. 
 
9 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”10 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.11 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”12 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.13 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.14 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.15 
 
                                                          
10 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
14 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
5 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”16 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”17 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.18  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of 
the ability to do so) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 These security concerns have not been mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation,  
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
17 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s numerous delinquent debts remain 
unresolved. I cannot conclude that Applicant’s financial indebtedness is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. His periods of involuntary unemployment were 
circumstances beyond his control. However, Applicant did not meet his burden to 
establish that he has acted responsibly to address his delinquent debts. 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. I credit Applicant with resolving the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.n. Because he did not provide corroborating documentary evidence, 
I cannot conclude that he negotiated a payment arrangement to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, that he is paying his child support debt, or that he has resolved 
other accounts not alleged in the SOR.  
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concern under this guideline, as set out in AG ¶ 15, includes: 
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”  
 
Applicant’s DUI and other arrests establish the general concerns involving 
questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and the 
following specific disqualifying condition under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factor: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s most recent arrest was over three years ago. I do not consider his 
arrests (especially the DUI, him knowingly driving on a suspended license, and failure to 
pay child support) to be minor offenses. Many of the arrests related to his DUI 
conviction. These offenses demonstrated a pattern of poor judgment and failure to 
follow rules. However, because so much time has passed without the recurrence of any 
similar offenses or any behavior that would suggest that they are likely to recur, I find 
that they do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns raised by his personal conduct, but not those raised by his financial 
indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
