 1 
     
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00709 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised by her criminal conduct and her failure to accurately disclose derogatory 
information as required during her background investigation. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on December 30, 
2014. On June 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines E and J. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on August 14, 2017. On that same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
 2 
(FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on August 21, 2017, and 
filed a response within the allotted 30 days. The case was assigned to me on January 2, 
2018.  
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline J, that in October 2014 Applicant was arrested 
and charged with felony child cruelty for abusing her then eight-year-old daughter. The 
SOR also alleges that in 2011 both of Applicant’s minor children were taken by child 
protective services (CPS) because of evidence of abuse on her then four-year-old 
daughter. Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant provided false information 
during her December 2016 sworn personal subject interview (PSI), and that she 
intentionally falsified her December 2014 e-QIP by failing to disclose her court-ordered 
counseling due to her 2014 arrest, and her 2011 CPS-required counseling. Applicant 
admits that her children were taken by CPS (SOR ¶ 1.b), and denies the remaining SOR 
allegations. However, she does admit that she was arrested in October 2014. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since August 2011. She was born in Central America and immigrated to the United States 
in 1998. She served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Navy from July 2002 until July 
2006. She graduated from high school in June 2002 and has completed two technical 
training programs, and several college courses. She and her husband married in 2005 
and they have two daughters, ages 12 and 10. (GX 3.)  
 
In approximately August 2011, Applicant’s four-year-old daughter presented at 
daycare with visible handprints on her arm. Daycare workers suspected child abuse and 
contacted the police. The police questioned Applicant, and as a result of the investigation 
the police contacted CPS, which took custody of Applicant’s two daughters. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
Applicant’s daughters were placed in foster care and Applicant was referred by CPS to 
counseling. Noncompliance with the requirements of the counseling program could have 
resulted in loss of custody of her children. Applicant completed the required counseling. 
 
On October 2, 2014, Applicant’s daughter’s daycare providers contacted the base 
police because they suspected Applicant’s daughter had been abused. The base police 
officers interviewed and took statements from the people who reported the incident, 
Applicant’s two daughters, and Applicant. As a result of these interviews, the base police 
determined that child abuse had occurred off base, and contacted the local police 
department, which arrested Applicant was arrested and charged her with felony child 
cruelty. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) The local police conducted their own interviews and took statements 
from all parties involved. (GX 5.) 
 3 
The summaries of both police reports consistently state the following facts: At 
around 11:00 a.m. on September 27, 2014, Applicant’s youngest daughter, then seven, 
was hungry and wanted to share her older sister’s breakfast. Applicant told her younger 
daughter that she could not eat because it was too close to lunchtime. Applicant’s older 
daughter then threw the remainder of her breakfast in the trash, which caused the younger 
daughter to begin to cry. Applicant reacted to her younger daughter’s crying by grabbing 
her daughter by the neck, throwing her to the floor, and punching her 6 to 8 times. 
Applicant also yelled at her daughter to be quiet. (GX 4; GX 5; GX 6; GX 7; Answer.) 
 
As a result of this incident, in order for the children to remain in their home with 
their father, CPS required Applicant to move out of the house. Following her arraignment 
and release from jail, Applicant moved into a hotel. However, CPS removed Applicant’s 
daughters from the home and placed them in foster care for approximately three weeks, 
until CPS verified that Applicant had removed her belongings from the house. Applicant 
remained out of the home until late November 2014. Applicant and her husband were 
ordered to attend one-hour weekly child-abuse-perpetrator class for six months. Applicant 
completed the classes as required. She has recently checked with the court several times 
for the disposition of her charges, but has not had a court appearance since her 
arraignment. In January 2016, Applicant went to the county courthouse and was given a 
document that stated “no cases or charges found.” However, Applicant has never 
received any information indicating that her case has been dismissed. (GX 7.) Applicant 
did not provide any documentation regarding the status of the charges.  
 
In her Answer, Applicant denies that she told the local police that she “grabbed her 
[daughter] by the neck, threw her on the floor and started punching her,” (SOR ¶ 1.a.) but 
admits that she was arrested in October 2014. Applicant explains that she made a 
statement to the base police officers but did not make a second statement to the local 
police. She further states that she told the base police only that she had “disciplined” her 
daughter. However, the Government’s evidence includes a copy of the local police’s 
report that contains the officer’s narrative detailing his interview with Applicant. (GX 5.) 
The summary of the base police officer’s interview with Applicant states, “she explained 
she knocked her down and punched her five or six times in the side and told her to stop 
crying.” (GX 4.)  
 
Applicant further states that she does not know what the base police told the local 
police, that she did not sign the field arrest report made by the base police, and had no 
way of “refuting the report.” However, Applicant provided a copy of the field arrest report 
from the base police, which states in the officer’s notes, signed under penalty of perjury 
by the officer, that Applicant “heard her daughter crying for food and she became angry. 
She threw her daughter to the ground and punched her about 6 to 8 times.”  
 
Also in her denial of SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant states that at the time of the alleged 
child abuse in 2014, her husband and his coworker did not notice any markings on 
Applicant’s daughter’s legs or neck on the day of the event, and that it was four days 
before the daycare providers reported their suspicions of abuse.  
 
 4 
Applicant admits that her children were taken by CPS in 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
However, she qualifies this admission, stating “there were many different instances where 
[her daughter] had bruises and bumps from falling and playing both at home and while 
attending full-time daycare.” 
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant denies abusing her child, and states that 
the person who reported the abuse is a former friend, with whom she had an earlier 
altercation and they were no longer on speaking terms at the time when the former friend 
reported the suspected abuse. Applicant further states that both police reports contain 
statements that she never made, and that the photographs that were allegedly taken of 
her daughter by the local police were never shown to Applicant or her husband despite 
several requests to see the pictures. She further states that she believes the police 
coerced her daughter into making the statements that her daughter made, stating that 
she has talked to her daughter about that day and her daughter “claims that she never 
told the officers that I punched her or choked her.” She goes on to say that, “though I 
know it has been three years since it occurred, I know that she still remembers what 
happened that afternoon.” 
 
Applicant gives a very long, detailed explanation about the 2011 incident, 
explaining that she grabbed her daughter’s arm to prevent her from tripping. Without 
provocation, Applicant provides details about a spanking that occurred coincident to the 
arm grabbing, and volunteers that the CPS caseworker misunderstood Applicant’s 
daughter’s explanation of why she was spanked. She then goes on to describe the 
mistreatment of her children by the caseworker and the foster parent, stating that “both 
of my girls will say now that anything I have done to them is nothing compared to the 
foster home.” Applicant states that, although her children have been taken away from her 
twice, “that is no real proof of criminal conduct.” 
 
Applicant denies making false statements to the investigator during her December 
2016 sworn PSI (SOR ¶ 2.a). She reiterates that she gave a statement to the base police 
who then contacted the local police, and that that she does not know what was said by 
the base police to the local police. She further reiterates that she did not sign the field 
arrest report, and was unable to refute its contents.  
 
However, during her December 2016 sworn PSI, Applicant told the investigator 
that on “the day before” her arrest, her youngest daughter “threw a fit when [Applicant] 
told her child to wait until lunchtime to eat,” and Applicant spanked her child three times. 
Applicant told the investigator that this is the account that she gave to police officers on 
the day of her arrest. She further denied ever having given a statement about “punching 
her child.” 
 
Applicant denies that she intentionally falsified her December 2014 e-QIP as 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. Applicant responded “no” when asked if, in the past seven 
years, she had “consulted with a healthcare professional regarding an emotional or 
mental health condition.” The instructions to the question permit an Applicant to answer 
“no” under certain specified circumstances, but only if the counseling was not court-
 5 
ordered and not related to violence by the Applicant. At the time Applicant completed her 
e-QIP, she was participating in court-ordered counseling for violence against her child. 
Applicant had also previously been required by CPS to attend two months of counseling 
for suspected child abuse in 2011.  
 
In her Answer, Applicant states her failure to list her then-current CPA-ordered 
counseling was because she did not understand the question, and that she was told by 
CPA that she would be tried in criminal court and in juvenile court, and that she was 
“under the impression that the question was referring to the criminal court system.”  
 
In response to SOR ¶ 2.b, Applicant stated that the 2011 counseling was voluntary. 
However, she provided a signed agreement that she would participate in counseling 
through Voluntary Family Maintenance Services, and that noncompliance with the 
program could result in her children being placed in protective custody or removed from 
the home.  
 
Applicant listed her October 2014 arrest, stating that she “was arrested because 
they found bruises on my child on her upper thigh and they think that I abused her.” She 
further stated that she had not been charged with any crime, and that no charges had 
been filed. She did not disclose that the arrest was for felony child cruelty, nor did she 
disclose that her children were removed from the home by CPA, and that she was 
currently participating in CPA-ordered counseling. 
 
Applicant asserts that she was going through very difficult period in 2014. She 
states that she has changed, is currently participating in counseling for depression, and 
has completed all the CPS-ordered counseling. She further states that she no longer 
spanks her children, nor does she yell at them. Applicant’s younger daughter states that 
her mother has changed, and that although she may not be perfect, she is not scared of 
her mother, and feels safe at home. 
 
Applicant’s supervisor considers Applicant to be professional, efficient, and a 
positive member of the team. Applicant’s two friends since 2015, a married couple, spend 
extensive social time with Applicant and her family, and view her as an outstanding 
parent, with whom they have entrusted their children. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
 6 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions apply under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence . . . of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
Despite Applicant’s denials, the record evidence establishes that Applicant abused 
her daughter in September 2014, and was arrested and charged with felony child cruelty 
as a result of this criminal conduct. It further establishes that Applicant’s children were 
removed from the home by CPS as a result of this instance, and also in 2011 due to 
suspected child abuse by Applicant. Although there has been no reported abuse by 
Applicant since 2014, and Applicant has completed both CPS-ordered courses of 
counseling, Applicant’s denial of her conduct, her deflecting her culpability, and her failure 
to accept responsibility for her actions cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment, and undermines the credibility of successful rehabilitation. The security 
concern raised by Applicant’s criminal conduct is not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 8 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
Applicant denies that she made false statements to the investigator during her 
December 2016 PSI. Instead, she states that she never described the incident of 
September 27, 2014, the way that both the base police report and the local police report 
reflected her statements. This is simply not plausible. Given the record evidence as a 
whole, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified her statements to the investigator during 
her PSI. None of the mitigating conditions apply to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Applicant also denies that she intentionally falsified her December 2016 e-QIP. 
Her explanation for why she did not list CPA-ordered counseling for child abuse 
perpetrators that she was actively participating in at the time she completed the e-QIP 
does not make sense. Her statement that she did not list the 2011 CPA-ordered 
counseling because it was “voluntary,” is not true. However, there is no record evidence 
that establishes that either of Applicant’s CPA-ordered counseling was characterized as 
being for an emotional or mental health condition. Therefore, Applicant technically did not 
falsify her e-QIP. SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c are resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 9 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
I have also considered Applicant’s honorable service on active duty in the U.S. 
Navy, and that Applicant is thought highly of by her supervisor and her friends. Although 
Applicant’s conduct occurred several years ago, her failure to accept responsibility for her 
actions remains a concern.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her conduct. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
