 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-00685 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a letter dated May 18, 2017, 
Applicant answered the allegations and requested a determination based on the written 
record. On June 21, 2017, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
with seven attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. 
Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated foreign 
influence and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, revisions have been made 
to the AG for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. The revised AG is applied here. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  Request for Administrative Notice  
 
The Government requested that I take administrative notice of its proffer of 
information regarding Pakistan. Having reviewed the information2 contained in the 
FORM at Item 7, I find the following:  
 
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is a federal republic made up of an executive, a 
legislative, and a judicial branch, whose powers and limitations are contained in a 
national constitution. The legislature is comprised of representatives in a bicameral 
parliament chosen through open elections from a multi-party system. A president, prime 
minister, and appointed cabinet members make up the head of the executive branch. 
Supreme court justices are appointed by the executive to oversee a common law legal 
system influenced by Islamic Sharia law.  
 
Most of Pakistan’s western border abuts Afghanistan. To the southwest, it shares 
a border with Iran. Extensive terror networks operate along the border with Afghanistan 
in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the central Afghanistan border, 
in the Khyber Pass region in northwest Pakistan, and in Balochistan Province in 
southwest Pakistan. Chief among these networks are the Taliban, the Haqqani, and al-
Qaeda. They operate in many cases without meaningful interference from the Pakistani 
government, and their activities consist of anti-U.S. and anti-coalition military operations 
across the border into Afghanistan. The FATA, and other areas mentioned above, 
provide safe havens from which terrorists have been able to plan and launch attacks on 
U.S. and coalition troops and interests in Afghanistan. Bombings and other acts of terror 
also have been reported throughout Pakistan, but the main focus of terrorist activity in 
Pakistan consists of attacks in urban areas, such as the capital city of Islamabad. 
Because of this information, the U.S. Department of State has issued numerous travel 
advisories and warnings to U.S. citizens considering traveling to Pakistan.  
 
The United States and Pakistan have had diplomatic relations since Pakistan 
obtained its independence in 1947. The countries’ interests have been in general 
agreement for much of that time. Starting in 2001, Pakistan helped the U.S. in its global 
war on terrorism and has helped capture hundreds of Taliban and Al-Qaeda personnel. 
However, efforts to deny areas adjacent to Afghanistan as safe havens for terrorist 
organization have not been as effective as the U.S. would like. Another issue related to 
terrorist activity in Pakistan is the fact that Pakistani government and military entities 
have committed numerous human rights violations in the name of counter-terror 
operations and investigations. Extra-judicial killings, arbitrary arrests without access to 
due process, and other human rights problems are commonplace.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old system administrator who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since 2009. He is married. He has not pursued any scholastic 
                                                          
2 In addition to the offered information contained in the FORM at Index 7, I also referred sua sponte to the 
CIA World Fact Book page regarding Pakistan, found at www.cia.gov. 
 
 
 
 
3 
education in the past decade. At age 18, he moved to this country from Pakistan and 
was naturalized an American citizen in November 2005. His wife, a registered alien, is 
also originally from Pakistan. They married in 2013, but have lived here as a couple 
since 2015. Applicant has no foreign investment or accounts. Applicant’s father is 
deceased. Applicant’s mother and brother live in his house, and are registered U.S. 
aliens. His married sister is a United States citizen and lives in another state.  
 
Applicant’s in-law are citizens and residents of Pakistan, living near Applicant’s 
place of birth. Applicant met his in-laws on his wedding day in Pakistan. His mother-in-
law is a housewife with no foreign government contact. Applicant’s father-in-law is a 
painter working for a company. He also has no foreign government contact. Applicant 
has no contact with his in-laws. It may be assumed his wife maintains some level of 
contact with her parents. Applicant provides no financial support to his in-laws.  
 
When the April 2017 SOR was issued, two of Applicant’s accounts had been 
identified as delinquent. The first, at allegation 1.a, was an account placed in collection 
with a balance of approximately $18,620. Much of this balance is related to Applicant’s 
2013 nuptials. As noted in the FORM, Applicant had been working with a debt 
consultant (DC) through a collection consultant (CC, INC) to arrange a settlement 
program for the debt with this lender (COLLECTION ACCOUNT).  
 
As evidence, Applicant introduced documentation reflecting that the debt was 
authorized to be settled for less than the full balance. An October 2016 was designed to 
settle the debt upon payment of 22 monthly payments of $675. What was lacking at the 
time Applicant responded to the SOR was evidence of the agreement terms and a 
nexus between the identified DC and the COLLECTION ACCOUNT lender noted in 
allegation 1.a.  
 
Applicant provided that nexus in response to the FORM with his submission of 
the written authorization of CC INC, by the COLLECTION ACCOUNT creditor, to settle 
the debt for $15,515.21 after a down payment of $665.21 and 22 monthly payments of 
$675. (Response to FORM at 8) In addition, Applicant provided a printout from DC of 
the agreed upon payment schedule, which was noted as having a commencement date 
on December 23, 2016 with the payment of a negotiation fee. Payment of that fee was 
to be followed with 22 monthly payments of $675, transacted each month from January 
2017 through October 2018. (Response to FORM at 9-10) Documentary evidence of 
payments on that schedule was offered in the SOR Response, reflecting payment of the 
$665.21 down payment and payments for January, February, March, and April 2017, 
which was the month Applicant received the SOR.   
 
At issue in SOR allegation 1.b was a charged-off account in the approximate 
amount of $5,733. This account concerned a balance on a vehicle over which Applicant 
was in disagreement. As noted in the FORM, Applicant negotiated a settlement with the 
lender to satisfy the debt upon payment of $4,013.33 in May 2017. A facsimile 
transmission copy of a letter was transmitted on May 17, 2017, reflecting that payment 
 
 
 
 
4 
of the settlement amount ($4,013.33) had been received and the account was 
considered to be settled in full. (SOR Response) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All reliable information about the 
person must be considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An a applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision is on an applicant.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard protected information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Interests  
 
 Under the AG, foreign contact and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U. S. interests or 
otherwise be made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Assessment of foreign contact and interests should consider the country in which the 
foreign contact or interest is included.  
 
 The AG lists nine available disqualifying conditions. Here, given that Applicant 
has in-laws who are foreign nationals living abroad, I find the following apply:  
 
¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country, if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, 
and  
 
¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
Under ¶ 8, three mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
  
¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 At the onset, I note that Applicant’s parents-in-law are residents and citizens of 
Pakistan, a country posing both risks to its citizens and travelers, but which is also a 
longtime partner with the United States in many areas concerning security and the fight 
against international terrorism. Applicant detailed that his in-laws, with whom he has 
personally had scant contact, have no nexus to a foreign government. Applicant’s 
mother-in-law is a homemaker, while his father-in-law is a painter working for a 
commercial concern. There is no suggestion that they work for or are involved with 
foreign agents, nor is there an indication they are under observation by a foreign 
government.  
 
 Meanwhile, the living members of Applicant’s immediate family are all here in the 
United States. As well, his mother and brother live under Applicant’s roof, and his sister 
 
 
 
 
6 
is married, settled, and living in another state. Applicant’s home is here, which he 
shares with his wife. He has lived in this country his entire adult life, has built a career 
here, and has worked for the same employer for nearly a decade. He has no 
investments anywhere but here. Under these facts, I find ¶ 8(a)-(b) apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant was shown to have had two delinquent debts amounting to about 
$24,000. This is sufficient to raise the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
          Applicant showed that the delinquent debt at SOR allegation 1.a, the largest debt, 
had already been subject to a reasonable settlement in repayment for about four 
 
 
 
 
7 
months when the SOR was issued. The lesser of the two delinquent debts was 
addressed and satisfied within a month of Applicant’s receipt of the SOR. His actions 
and methods reflect that he has an understanding of basic finance, and they also show 
he knows how to resort to financial experts when needed. Under these facts, I find that   
AG ¶ 20(d) applies.    
      
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under the AG, the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. That analysis includes the fact that 
Applicant is a 36-year-old system administrator who has worked for the same defense 
contractor for nearly a decade. Married, he came to this country at age 18 and became 
a naturalized United States citizen in 2005. He married a lady from Pakistan in 2013, 
and the couple has been settled in Applicant’s home for several years.  
 
Living with them is Applicant’s mother and brother, while Applicant’s sister has 
married and settled in a distant state. Remaining in Pakistan are Applicant’s in-laws, a 
homemaker and a painter with no nexus to a foreign government. Applicant has virtually 
no communication with them, although it may be assumed his wife maintains some 
degree of contact with them. Despite this connection, Applicant’s wife, immediate family, 
profession, home, and holdings are in the United States, where he has entire adult life. 
 
Regarding two delinquent accounts, Applicant presented documentary evidence 
reflecting his actions in addressing these debts. He showed that one was settled for a 
slightly reduced amount and a payment plan instituted before he received the SOR. The 
less debt was satisfied in full within a month of his receipt of that document. In sum, 
Applicant has responsibly addressed his two delinquent debts. Based on the foregoing, 
I find Applicant mitigated security concerns related to foreign influence and finances.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
