 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00094 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 17, 2015. 
On February 28, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on May 15, 2017. The 
case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. On January 12, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
February 1, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted into evidence without 
objection. The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I, and its request for administrative notice of relevant facts about the Russian 
Federation (Russia) as HE II. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record 
open until February 8, 2018. Applicant provided additional documents that were admitted 
into evidence as AE C through H, without objection. Applicant’s post-hearing emails were 
appended collectively to the record as HE III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 9, 2018. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they were 
in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have been 
the same under the either version. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At the hearing, I granted the Government’s motion, without objection, to amend the 
SOR to delete subparagraph 1.a of Guideline B, and the entire Guideline C allegation, 
including subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b.3  
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant, age 46, has two minor children, the elder from his first marriage of 13 
years and the younger from his second marriage of 4 years. Applicant earned his 
bachelor’s degree in 1996 from a university in Russia and his master’s degree in 2008 
from a U.S. university. He has worked as a network engineer for a U.S. information 
technology company since 2014. This is his first application for a security clearance. He 
has worked for U.S. companies since 1999, including as a federal contractor between 
2005 and 2012.5  
 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD 4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD 4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD 4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD 4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The new AG, which are found at 
Appendix A to SEAD 4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or continued access to classified national 
security information. (SEAD 4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Pleading: Government’s Amendment to the SOR; AE A and B; Tr. at 10-12. 
 
4 I extracted these facts from Applicant’s SOR answer, his SCA (GE 1), his biography (AE B), and to other 
parts of the record as indicated by citation. 
 
5 AE A, D, H; Tr. at 6-8, 22-25, 29, 30, 39-40. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States from Russia in 1999 with his first wife, a 
U.S. citizen by birth, whom he met in Russia while she was an exchange student at his 
university. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003. Since then, he has voted in 
every local, state, and federal election. Both of his children are U.S. citizens by birth. His 
second wife, whom he sponsored for immigration to the United States, a Russian citizen 
by birth, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2017. She works as a nurse in a local 
hospital, and is pursuing an advanced nursing degree from a U.S. university.6  
 
Applicant’s 70-year-old mother, a Russian citizen, resides in Russia. She is a high-
school teacher and a part-time school tutor, for which she collectively earns approximately 
$400 per month. She also receives a $300 monthly pension similar to U.S. social security. 
Applicant’s father passed away two years ago and he has no siblings. His father worked 
for a chemical factory. Applicant has visited his mother in Russia (and his father before 
he passed away) at least once a year since he obtained his U.S. passport in 2003, and 
speaks to her every day by phone. His mother visits him in the United States 
approximately once a year. Applicant plans to sponsor his mother’s immigration to the 
United States within the next three years.7 
 
 Applicant’s 56-year-old mother-in-law (MIL) and his 58-year-old father-in-law (FIL) 
are Russian citizens residing in Russia. His MIL is retired from a factory as an accountant. 
His FIL is a truck driver for a construction company. He has visited his in-laws with his 
wife on three occasions between 2013 and 2017, during his visits to Russia to see his 
own mother. His wife speaks to his MIL everyday by phone, and with his FIL 
approximately twice per month by phone. Applicant generally speaks to his in-laws only 
on holidays and their birthdays. His FIL’s physical work location is outside of the town in 
which he resides with his MIL. Therefore, his FIL only actual lives with his MIL during 
visits twice per year.8 
 
 Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s wife has a brother who is a Russian 
citizen, who resides in the same home with her parents and his two minor children. Her 
brother is divorced, and owns a small business (grocery store). His wife also has a 
grandmother who is a Russian citizen and resident, to whom she speaks with by phone 
approximately once a month. Her grandmother has never worked outside the home.9 
  
 Applicant and his wife have no intent to return to Russia, and consider the United 
States their permanent home. Applicant does not own any assets in Russia. He owns his 
home and maintains all of his assets in the United States, including life insurance, 
checking and savings accounts, and retirement and education savings plans. He received 
                                                          
6 GE 1 at 7, 19-25; AE A, B, and F; Tr. at 22-26, 29, 44-45. 
 
7 AE A; GE 1 at 22-23; Tr. at 25-28, 30-31, 32, 33-34, 40-45, 51-54. 
 
8 GE 2 at 23-25; Tr. at 28-29; 34-35, 46-49, 54. 
 
9 Tr. at 47-48, 57. 
 
 
4 
 
an excellence award for his support of the U.S. federal judiciary in 2007. His current 
manager praised Applicant’s work performance.10  
 
Administrative Notice (Russia) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Russia, as outlined in HE II and the documents appended thereto, including 
the following: 
 
 Russia has a highly centralized, authoritarian political system. 
 
 Russia’s human rights problems include restrictions on political participation 
and freedom of expression, assembly, and media; suppression of civil 
society; extensive official corruption; torture and excessive force by law 
enforcement officers. The government failed to take adequate steps to 
prosecute or punish most officials who committed abuses, resulting in a 
climate of impunity. 
 
 Russia continues to be a leading state intelligence threat to U.S. interests.  
 
 Russia continues to target U.S. and allied personnel with access to sensitive 
computer network information.  
 
 The many Russian immigrants with advanced technical skills who work for 
leading U.S. companies may be increasingly targeted for recruitment by 
Russian intelligence services. 
 
 In 2010 and 2011, eleven individuals plead guilty to conspiring to serve as 
unlawful agents of Russia within the United States. 
 
 Russia continues to take information warfare to a new level, working to fan 
anti-United States and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and 
globally. 
 
 In 2016, the U.S. intelligence community concluded that actions taken by 
Russia to interfere with the U.S. election process was part of a decade-long 
campaign of cyber-enabled operations directed at the U.S. government and 
its citizens. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”11 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
                                                          
10 AE A, and C through F; Tr. at 63-66. 
 
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 
 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”12 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”13 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”14 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.15 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”16 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.17 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
                                                          
 
12 Egan at 527. 
 
13 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
14 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
15 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
6 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.18 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.19 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”20 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
                                                          
18 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s ties to his mother, MIL, and FIL establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) based 
on the heightened risk associated with Russia, and the potential conflict of interest that 
arises from his connection to them. A heightened risk is associated with Russia, a highly 
centralized and authoritarian government, because it conducts espionage against the 
United States and has a poor human rights record. 
 
The following mitigating condition under this guideline is established: 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant maintains familial ties with his mother, MIL, and FIL. His wife also 
maintains familial ties with her brother and grandmother. Although none of these family 
members have specific affiliations with countries that would raise a concern, there is 
heightened risk associated with the country of Russia that forms the basis of a concern 
regardless of any such affiliations. 
 
Applicant chose to make the United States his permanent home almost 19 years 
ago and has no plans to return to live in Russia. His wife and two children are U.S. citizens 
by birth. All of his assets are in the United States, including his home. Applicant pursued 
his postgraduate degree from a U.S. university, and has had a successful career working 
for U.S. companies, including federal contractors, since he immigrated to the United 
States. He plans to sponsor his mother, who visits him annually in the United States, for 
her immigration to the United States within the next three years. Despite his familial ties 
to Russia, his much deeper ties are in the United States. I conclude that Applicant would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Accordingly, Applicant has met 
his heavy burden to mitigate the Government’s Guideline B concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I weighed the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline B, and evaluated all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person and the heightened risk associated with Russia. I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated security concerns raised by his familial ties to citizens and residents of Russia. 
Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.b – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
