 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02303 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government did not establish the personal conduct security concern and 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 22, 2017, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written 
case was submitted on November 3, 2017. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on November 13, 2017. She did not respond to the 
Government’s FORM. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are 
admitted in evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on February 14, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.p. As she did not 
specifically admit or deny SOR ¶ 2.a, but indicated that she did not intentionally falsify 
her application, I have construed her response as a denial.1  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, married, and has one stepchild who is a minor. She 
has worked as an aircraft mechanic for a defense contractor since February 2016. She 
obtained her high school diploma in 2003, an associate’s degree in 2005, and two 
additional associate’s degrees in 2016. She has never held a security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR alleges delinquencies for eight consumer accounts totaling $15,250 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.g-1.i, 1.l-1.n), four federal student loans totaling $1,214 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.d-1.f), and four medical accounts totaling $961 (SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.k, 1.o, 1.p). It also 
alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified her March 2016 security application when 
she failed to disclose her repossessed car, the balance of which was charged off as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
  Credit reports from April 2016 and May 2017 verify Applicant’s delinquent debts. 
She also discussed them during her background interviews in 2017.3 
 
 Applicant attributes her delinquent debts to quitting the job she held since 
October 2005 in May 2014, so that she could go to school. She was consequently 
unemployed from June 2014 to February 2016, during which she time she attended 
school for her two associate’s degrees, as discussed above. She was financially 
supported by her spouse. She also acknowledged that she forgot about some of her 
debts, to include some of her medical debts, and she also believed that some of her 
medical debts were covered by insurance.4  
 
 Applicant stated that she was trying to resolve her financial delinquencies. She 
stated that she was paying some of her debts and hoped to begin paying the remainder 
of them in 2018. She provided documentation to show that at her request, her federal 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 2-3. 
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
4 Items 2-4. 
 
 
3 
 
student loans were approved for forbearance until January 21, 2018, at which time she 
was to resume with payments.5 
 
  As mentioned previously, Applicant stated that she did not intentionally falsify her 
application when she failed to list her repossessed car. She stated that she did not 
know what she was thinking when she responded “No.” She apologized for the 
misunderstanding.6 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay her debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant was approved for a forbearance of her federal student loans until 
January 2018, after which time she was to resume payments. I therefore find SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f for Applicant. 
 
Applicant’s decision to quit the job she held since 2005 so that she could go to 
school, and forgetting about some of her debts, do not constitute conditions beyond her 
control. She did not provide documentation to show that she has paid or otherwise 
resolved any of her remaining delinquent debts. There is no evidence that she received 
financial counseling. She did not provide documentation to show that some of her 
medical debts were covered by insurance. At this time, there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue to cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant stated that she did not intentionally fail to list her repossessed car. She 
stated that she did not know what she was thinking when she responded “No.” She 
apologized for the misunderstanding. When a falsification allegation is controverted, as 
in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, 
does not prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 
2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). I 
conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in this whole-person analysis.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
the Government did not establish the security concern under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.g - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d - 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
