 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 17-00576 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86), seeking eligibility for a public trust position. On April 17, 2017, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F.  
 
 On April 28, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On May 18, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. 
On May 26, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the 
case to me. On June 26, 2017, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing 
on August 15, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and 
B, which was received in evidence without objection. I held the record open until 
September 29, 2017, to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Applicant timely submitted AE C through E, which were received in evidence without 
objection. On August 23, 2017, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations. Additional findings 
of fact follow.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old office manager employed by a defense contractor since 
November 2013. She seeks a position of public trust to enhance her position within her 
company. (GE 1, Tr. 14-19)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1997. She estimates that she has 
earned “[p]robaby between 15 and 30” college credit hours. (Tr. 19) Applicant was 
married from March 2002 to April 2011, and from May 2011 to August 2015. Both 
marriages ended by divorce. She has been living with a cohabitant and current boss since 
November 2013. Applicant has two daughters, ages 14 and 12, from her first marriage 
who reside with her. (GE 1; Tr. 19-22) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists four debts, a charged-off credit card account for $11,851, a 
credit card collection account for $522, a credit card collection account for $150, and a 
collection account for $91. Total debt alleged is $12,614. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d) These 
allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions and the Government’s 
exhibits. (GE 1 – 3) 
 
Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to her two divorces, moving expenses, 
and six months of unemployment. She also testified that she does not receive the full 
amount of her monthly child support, which adds stress to her budget. (Tr. 23-24) The 
status of her debts is discussed below. 
 
1.a – CHARGED-OFF CREDIT CARD FOR $11,851. Applicant stated that her 
former husband was responsible for a large portion of the charges made on this credit 
card. The credit card was in Applicant’s name and she was held responsible for all 
charges incurred. Applicant made payment arrangements to make $229 monthly 
payments. Post-hearing, she submitted documentation that she began making those 
payments. This monthly payment is a line item on her monthly budget. (SOR answer; Tr. 
9, 24-25, 27-30; AE D, AE E) DEBT BEING RESOLVED. 
 
1.b – CREDIT CARD COLLECTION ACCOUNT FOR $522. Paid in full. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 10-12; AE A, AE B) DEBT RESOLVED. 
 
1.c – CREDIT CARD COLLECTION ACCOUNT FOR $150. Paid in full. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 10-12; AE A) DEBT RESOLVED. 
 
3 
                                         
 
1.d – COLLECTION ACCOUNT FOR $91. Paid in full. (SOR answer; Tr. 10-12; 
AE A) DEBT RESOLVED. 
 
As reflected above, Applicant is making payments on one or her debts and has 
paid the other three debts. Applicant Applicant’s annual salary is “[p]robably about 
$11,000 to $13,000.” She estimates her monthly take-home pay is “[a]nywhere from $700 
to $1,000 a month.” Applicant shares housing expenses with her cohabitant. (Tr. 25-27) 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a budget that reflects she is leading a modest life style 
and lives within her means. She has a net monthly remainder of $33. (AE C) 
    
Policies 
 
In issuing the SOR, DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation);1 and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent implemented 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG), effective June 8, 2017, which replaced the 2006 AG, and are applicable to all 
adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. I decided this case under the 
current AGs implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
The DOD considers ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be 
eligible for sensitive duties, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be 
such that assigning the person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the national 
security interests of the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions are entitled 
to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination is made. (Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
                                            
1 ADP cases are adjudicated under the provisions of the Directive. (Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004.) 
 
4 
                                         
 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be 
resolved in favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established these disqualifying 
conditions requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists five potential mitigating conditions: 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Her debt is 
a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, she receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the 
debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because her two divorces and 
unemployment were circumstances beyond her control and she acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Even though she did not have the funds to remain current on her 
debts, she remained in contact with her creditors and has taken reasonable steps to 
resolve her debts.2  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable even though Applicant did not seek formal 
financial counseling. She has, however, produced evidence that reflects she is living 
within her means and has regained financial responsibility. There are clear indications 
that her financial problems are resolved or are being resolved. Furthermore, there is 
sufficient information to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).3 Despite her limited 
resources, Applicant worked diligently with her creditor to set up a payment plan for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and paid off the other three smaller debts. Given her limited financial 
resources, Applicant has done all that can reasonably be expected of her. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public 
trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                            
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts current. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(c). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised 
by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant her eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
