                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  17-01782           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective June 8, 2017, by
Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD 4), dated December 10,
2016, entitled National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all covered individuals who
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to
hold a sensitive position.   
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 27, 2017, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on September 15, 2017. He did not supplement the record. The case
was assigned to me on December 19, 2017.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated 16 delinquent debts
exceeding $14,000 and (b) incurred a personal judgment in 2009 in the amount of
$2,062. Allegedly, these debts have not been addressed and remain outstanding.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his electronics questionnaires for
investigations processing (e-QIP) by omitting the judgment debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.q.
Allegedly, this judgment debt belongs to Applicant.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged debts with
explanations. He denied only the SOR creditor ¶ 1.q judgment, claiming the judgment
debt belongs to his father who has the same name and recently passed away. Applicant
claimed he has experienced financial hardships with his employer’s restructuring and
receives less overtime pay. He claimed he has two kids in college and had one of his
student loan lenders garnish his pay. He also claimed he has borrowed from his 401k
retirement account and worked with his student loan creditor to reduce the amount of his
monthly garnishment. 
Addressing the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 2.a, Applicant denied falsifying his e-
QIP with explanations. He claimed the alleged omission covers the SOR ¶ 1.q judgment
debt that does not belong to him. He claimed he contacted the SOR ¶ 1.q creditor in an
effort to delete the judgment debt from his credit report, but with no success.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old engineering technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in March 1997 and has two children from this marriage. (Items 3
and 5) He earned an associate’s degree in March 2002. (Item 3) He enlisted in the Navy
in May 1989 and served four years of active duty before receiving an honorable discharge
in May 1993. (Items 3 and 5)  Between February 1997 and December 2005, he served in
the Active Navy Reserve. In December 2005, Applicant transferred to the Inactive Navy
2
Reserve and served three years before he was honorably discharged in December 2008.
(Items 3 and 5) 
Since March 2005, Applicant has worked for his current employer. (Items 3 and 5)
Between January 1997 and March 2005, he was employed by other employers, some of
whom were federal contractors. (Items 3 and 5) 
Applicant’s finances
Between 2015 and 2017, Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent student loan,
medical, and consumer debts exceeding $13,000. (Items 2-6) One of his listed consumer 
debts (SOR debt ¶ 1.q) is a judgment entered in December 2009 in the amount of $2,061.
(Items 4-5 and 7) He claimed this judgment covers his father who has the same name as
Applicant, and who is now deceased. (Item 2) He provided no written evidence to
document his claims, without which the judgment cannot be resolved favorably to
Applicant. (Items 2-5) 
Records confirm that one of Applicant’s six private student loan debts (SOR ¶¶ 1a-
1.b, 1.d, and 1.f-1.h) was covered by a wage garnishment order issued in January 2017.
(Item 6) The garnishment was initially set for 15% per paycheck by the court overseeing
the garnishment initiative, but has since been reduced to 5% per pay check. (Items 2-6)
An incident report produced by the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS)
confirmed that the student loans covered by the garnishment order originated from
Applicant’s privately held loans. (Item 6)
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to financial hardships associated with his
employer’s restructuring in 2016, which resulted in his generating less income from
overtime work for the entire year of 2016. (Items 2-4 and 7) In an interview with an
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management in January 2017, he told the
investigator that his situation is slowly improving with his resumed overtime pay, and he is
“trying to get his bills paid current and paid off.” (Item 5) 
Applicant’s credit reports reveal that Applicant is current with most of his reported
accounts. (Items 4 and 7) To date, though, he has not provided any probative evidence of
his voluntarily addressing any of his listed debts. He has not sought financial counseling
or debt consolidation. And he offered no specific payment plans to the OPM investigator
who interviewed him in January 2017. (Item 5)
E-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in June 2016, Applicant omitted a listed judgment
taken by SOR creditor ¶ 1.q against him in 2009 in the amount of $2,061. (Items 4-6)
Applicant has consistently disputed this judgment as a judgment belonging to his father,
who has since passed away. (Items 2 and 5). While he did not provide any documentary
proof of the judgment error and ensuing reporting mistake, his explanations are plausible
and credible enough for acceptance. 
3
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, Appendix (App.) 4 lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges
in the decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take
into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual
applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include
conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
4
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor,dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is
any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during
national security investigative or adjudicating processes  .  . . .  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s delinquent debts. Applicant’s
accumulation of multiple debt delinquencies over a four-year period warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability
to satisfy debts,” DC ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to
do so,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s delinquent debts merit some application of MC ¶ 20(b). MC ¶ 20(b)
extenuates financial concerns where “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.” 
In Applicant’s case, he attributed his debts (especially his student loan
delinquencies) to reduced overtime pay. Without more detail about his debts and the
circumstances in which they arose, his explanations are insufficient to enable him to
take full advantage of MC ¶ 20(b).   
Applicant’s unresolved debt delinquencies prevent him from meeting the Appeal
Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008);  see also ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd.
Jan. 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR
Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
Personal conduct concerns
Applicant’s omission of an adverse judgment entered against him in December
2009 raised initial security concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability. However,
he persuasively demonstrated that the judgment belonged to his father who has the
same name and has since passed away.  Allegations that Applicant falsified his e-QIP
are unsubstantiated. 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s contributions to the defense
industry over the course of his lengthy employment with his current contractor are
6
considerable and worthy of respect. They are not enough, though, to overcome security
concerns associated with his history of accumulating delinquent debts with no
documented evidence of his voluntarily working with his creditors and making concerted
efforts to address them after they became delinquent. His delinquent debts remain a
source of trust concern. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt accruals and
failure to address them when circumstances permitted, his actions to date in dealing
with his SOR debts are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
the allegations covered by SOR debts  ¶¶ 1.a-1.p of Guideline F. Favorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to subparagraph 1.q of guideline F and the allegations
covered by the personal conduct guideline.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact and the factors listed above, I make the following formal
findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.p:       Against Applicant
Subpara.   1.q:                                               For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:                  For Applicant
                            
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
