                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
           ----------------------------------                  )       ISCR  Case No.  17-00957          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel
                     For Applicant: Pro se                    
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant  
failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On August 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and DoD 5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security
Program (PSP).
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, in accordance with the
guiding principles governing fair process proceedings in Exec. Or. 10865, and subject to
the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 25, 2017, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on October 17, 2017, interposed no objections to the materials in the
FORM, and supplemented the FORM within the time permitted with additional
information. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to timely file federal tax returns for
tax years 2010-2016; (b) failed to timely file state returns for tax years 2010-2016; (c)
incurred a state tax lien in 2015 in the approximate amount of $5,710; and (d) 
accumulated 16 delinquent student loan and consumer debts cumulatively exceeding
$25,000. Allegedly, the listed tax lien, student loan, and consumer debts remain
unresolved and outstanding.
                
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations with 
explanations. She claimed that all of her delinquent federal and state tax returns for tax
years 2010-2016 have since been filed. She claimed that she entered into a payment
agreement with her state tax creditor (SOR ¶ 1.c) and rehabilitation payment plan with
her student loan creditor ¶¶ 1.e-1.h. She further claimed that alleged SOR creditors ¶¶
1.d, 1i, and 1.q are included in a debt consolidation agreement of August 2017. 
Applicant denied the allegations covered in SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.p and 1.r-1.s for the
stated reason that these debts no longer appear on her credit report of August 2017.
Applicant attached copies of her September 2017 payment agreement with her state
taxing authority, her debt consolidation agreement covering her consumer creditors, and
an August 2017 credit report.
In her November 2017 response to the FORM, Applicant supplemented her 
response with attachments: a signed November 2017 retainer agreement with a tax
defender service who will represent her in her dispute with the state over an amount
owed under a 2015 state tax lien; a US Department of Education (ED) rehabilitation
agreement of November 2017 with acknowledged first payment; a debt consolidation
agreement of November 2017 with an included payment plan and credited first three
$226 payments made under the terms of her agreement; and an August 2017 credit
report with another credit reporting company. Applicant confirmed again that all of her
federal and state tax returns for tax years 2010-2016 have been filed (citing a claimed
receipt included in her FORM response)
2
Finding   s   of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old financial business analyst for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has three children. (Item 3) She attended college
between June 2012 and October 2012, but earned no degree or diploma. (Item 3)
Applicant never served in the military. (Items 3 and 4)
Since January 2014, Applicant has worked for her current employer. (Items 3 and
4) Between June 2013 and January 2014, she was employed by a non-DoD employer as
a program analyst. She reported unemployment between January 2013 and June 2013.
Previously, she worked for other non-DoD employers in various technical positions.
(Items 3-4)
Applicant’s finances
Federal and state tax records confirm that Applicant failed to timely file her federal
and state tax returns for tax years 2010-2016. (Items 3-4) She attributed her failures to
timely file her federal and state tax returns to a custody issue without specifics. (Items 2
and 12) In her response to the FORM, she claimed again that all of her federal and state
tax returns have been filed (citing to a receipt attached to her answer), but failed to
provide any corroborating proof of filing her back tax returns for the years in issue. (Item
12) DOHA requests for IRS transcripts for tax years 2010 through 2016 were not
furnished by Applicant. Without these transcripts or other documented proofs of filing for
the covered years, no factual determinations can be made whether she filed her tax
returns for tax years 2010-2016, when she filed them, whether the IRS approved the
filings, if late, and how much back taxes are owed (inclusive of late filing penalties and
accumulated interest). 
In the retainer agreement Applicant arranged with a tax defender group in
November 2017, she agreed to fees totaling $2,450 in return for the tax firm’s
commitment to use its best efforts to investigate and resolve any federal or state tax
filings and debts that might be due or owing to either or both of the tax jurisdictions. (Item
12). If applicable, the engaged tax defender, among its agreed commitments, was
authorized to file appropriate power of attorney forms, negotiate compromise offers with
the tax authorities, prepare or amend Applicant’s federal and state returns for tax years
2005-2016, and release/modify wage garnishment orders and/or bank levies. Scheduled
monthly payments of $204 to the tax firm that were to begin in November 2017 have not
been documented. (Item 12) Her cover letter and attached retainer agreement contain
neither federal and state tax transcripts corroborating her tax filing for the years in issue,
3
nor other probative evidence of her filing her returns in issue with the appropriate taxing
authorities. 
Besides the retainer agreement Applicant executed with her tax defender firm,
Applicant completed an ED rehabilitation agreement in November 2017. (Item 13) Under
the terms of this agreement, Applicant agreed to make $100 monthly payments to ED,
beginning in November 2017. (Item 13) After satisfying nine monthly payment
requirements of the agreement, she will be considered rehabilitated and eligible to be
restored to permanent loan status. (Item 13) Because Applicant did not provide any
documented monthly payments, it is unclear what kind of progress she is making on her 
rehabilitation agreement with ED. The retainer agreement itself provided no documentation
of Applicant’s payments to date under her agreement with ED. (Item 13) 
To address her medical and consumer debts that cumulatively exceed $15,000,
Applicant entered into a contractual arrangement with a debt repair firm in August 2017.
(Item 2) She provided an account screen of covered debts in November 2017, but no
documentation of progress made in resolving the individual medical and consumer
accounts covered in the agreement. (Item 14)
All told, Applicant has over 17 delinquent accounts listed in her credit reports
covered in the FORM  (inclusive of the state tax lien covered by SOR paragraph ¶ 1.c). To
date, she has failed to resolve or demonstrate payment progress with the identified
creditor debts covered by the three agreements she completed with her tax defender firm,
ED, and her debt repair firm
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG ¶
2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
4
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
5
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file her federal and
state tax returns for tax years 2010-2016; her incurring an unresolved state tax lien in
the amount of $5,710; and her accumulating delinquent student loan, medical, and
consumer debts exceeding $25,000. Applicant’s failure to timely file federal and state
tax returns for multiple years, her incurring of a state tax lien, and her accumulating
other delinquent debts warrant the application of four of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”; 19 b), “unwillingness to
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations”; and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Applicant’s admitted federal and state tax filing lapses, incurring of a state tax
lien, and accumulation of delinquent student loan, medical, and consumer debts  negate
the need for any independent proof. See McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006).
Each of Applicant’s admitted untimely filing of her federal and state tax returns,
unresolved state tax lien, and accumulated delinquent student loan, medical, and
consumer debts are fully documented and create some judgment issues. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a security clearance that
entitles him to access classified information. While the principal concern of a security
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving tax filing lapses
and debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of filing federal tax returns and resolving federal and state
tax delinquencies are critical to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness,
reliability, and good judgment in following rules and guidelines necessary for those
6
seeking access to classified information or to holding a sensitive position. See ISCR
Case No. 14-06808 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App.
Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). Applicant’s cited extenuating circumstances (i.e., unemployment,
poor professional tax advice, and insufficient income to pay his federal and state taxes
when due and payable) provide some mitigation credit for her failure to timely file her
federal tax returns and address her federal and state taxes due for the tax years in
issue. The cited circumstances she attributes to her filing lapses and debt delinquencies
are not enough to entitle her to any extenuating benefits from MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” 
Similarly, satisfaction of Applicant’s evidentiary burden of providing probative
evidence of her addressing her state tax lien and accumulated delinquent student loan,
medical, and consumer accounts requires more than completion of repayment
agreements. While her tax defender, rehabilitation, and debt relief agreements are
encouraging, they are not enough by themselves to mitigate Applicant’s financial
delinquencies without more evidence of a seasoned payment history.
Applicant’s failure or inability to corroborate her claimed filings of her 2010-2016
federal and state tax returns, provide IRS and state transcripts covering the tax years in
issue, and demonstrate a good track record of compliance with terms of her agreements
precludes her from fully availing herself of the  benefits of any of the potentially available
mitigating conditions. See ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017);
ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005).
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts, and implicitly where applicable the timely filing of tax
returns. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)  In Applicant’s case,
her failures or inability to establish payment histories with her covered creditors after the
initiation of the security clearance process are not enough to warrant favorable findings
and conclusions with respect to raised security concerns over the state of her finances. 
Whole-Person Assessment
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. She has shown
insufficient  progress to date in addressing her federal and state delinquent tax returns.
Similarly, she has provided little probative evidence of addressing her unresolved state
tax lien and other delinquent debts associated with her student loans, medical accounts,
and consumer debts to merit enough positive overall credit to mitigate financial
concerns. What general contributions she has made to her current employer are not
enough to overcome historical trust and judgment issues associated with her failure to
timely file her federal and state tax returns over the course of several years (i.e., 2010-
7
2016), her incurrence of a state lien (still unresolved), and her accumulation of
delinquent consumer loan, medical, and consumer debts. These cited tax-filing lapses,
state tax lien, and accumulated student loan, medical, and consumer accounts are still
not fully resolved.    
Overall, Applicant’s actions to date in addressing her finances reflect too little
evidence of restored financial responsibility and judgment to overcome reasonable
doubts about her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to protect classified information.
See AG ¶ 18. Conclusions are warranted that her finances are not sufficiently stabilized
at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a security clearance. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶
1.a-1.s. Eligibility to hold a security clearance under the facts and circumstances of this
case is inconsistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
             Subparagraph 1.a-1.s:                           Against Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
9
  
10
