                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04854
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
W ESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 8, 2010. The case was assigned to
me on June 14, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on July 21, 2010.  A hearing was
held on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of 20
2
exhibits (GE).  All of the Government’s exhibits were admitted. Applicant relied on one
witness (himself) and two exhibits (AE). The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 29,
2010. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly resigned his position as acting fire
lieutenant for a city fire department in September 2003, in lieu of involuntary termination
for the following conduct: (1) untruthful during an EEO statement; (2) violation of sexual
harassment policy; (3) use of position in an inpropriate manner; (4) compromise of a
felony investigation; and (5) actions not favorable to the City, Fire Department, and
Police Department.  In his February 2010 response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each
of the allegations.  He provided no explanations. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old mechanical technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in November 1982 and has two children (ages 26 and 23) from
his marriage. (GE 1) He and his wife have since divorced. Applicant has a high school
diploma and a fire academy certificate from a reputable technical school. Applicant has
no military service and has been employed by his current employer since November
2003. (GE 1)  
Acting on the recommendations of an old friend, Applicant (in 1981) went to work
for a local municipality. (GE 4).  He took leave from his job in 1983 to attend college, and
resumed his city employment in 1986 with the city’s local fire department. (see GEs 2
and 4)  He received regular promotions during his first ten years of service with the city’s
fire department. In 1996, he attended the city’s police academy and became a fire
inspector. (compare GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 82) Although commissioned by the police
department, he continued to work for the fire department and was responsible for fire
investigations. (GE 2)  
In 2001, Applicant began working on a fire investigation case that involved two
brothers (A and B). These brothers founded and owned separate businesses that
serviced fire extinguishing equipment and fire protection systems. (GE 2) Applicant
worked on this case in cooperation with a detective (D) for the local police department.
(Tr. 88)
In the process of working his department’s case against B, D learned that B’s wife
(C) was a dispatcher for the central dispatch for the city’s police and fire departments.
(GE 2)  When they initially presented their case to the city’s district attorney (DA), the DA
told them their case was weak and requested more evidence. (GE 2) The DA also
3
suggested that Applicant and D back off their investigation of B for the time being. (Tr.
90)
Sometime later (in 2002), C approached Applicant and asked him “what was
going on with the case against B.” (GE 2) In this conversation, Applicant provided C
details of the investigation against her husband. (GE 2) Applicant advised the DA of his
contacts with C and was told that he should not have discussed the case with her. (GE
2)  Applicant’s superior also criticized him for discussing the case with C.
Shortly after Applicant was counseled by the DA to avoid conversations with C
about the status of the investigation against B, B and C joined Applicant and D in a
lawsuit against the city.  In their complaint, they accused Applicant and D of “singling
them out and harassing them.” (GE 2)  After they were investigated by EEO personnel,
Applicant and D were cleared by the police department’s internal affairs division of any
wrongdoing. (GE 2)   
Applicant and D continued to work the case against A and B throughout 2002.  As
the result of their investigation, A was arrested for fraud. (GE 2) Following his arrest, A
was jailed for a week. When he was released pending charges against him, he
committed suicide. (GE 2; Tr. 94) Applicant and D were subsequently cleared by their
fire and police departments of any wrongdoing in connection with the arrest of A. (GE 8)
Applicant and D, in turn, put their investigation of B on hold. (GE 2) C and B thereafter
dropped their harassment suit against Applicant and D. (Tr. 95-97)
In a taped January 2003 telephone conversation with C (initiated by Applicant),
Applicant asked C on several occasions whether she and her husband were still living
together and discussed his own marital status with her. (see GEs 9 and 14).  Told by C
that she was still married and living with her husband, Applicant responded as follows:
“So coming to your house is not an option, I guess, if he’s there.” (GE 2) Before
terminating his conversation with C, he inquired if she was still “doing massages at all.”
(GE 2)  When she responded affirmatively, Applicant suggested that “maybe we’ll talk
about that.” (GE 2)  C reacted positively to Applicant’s suggestion.  
After more fraud complaints were filed against B, Applicant and D activated their
investigation of B.  In August 2003, C contacted Applicant by telephone and asked to
meet him to discuss the case.  When Applicant arrived at the meeting site, C entered
Applicant’s city vehicle and pressed him for details of his investigation against B.
Applicant told C of another complaint against B, and an instituted investigation against B
by the local police department. After thanking him for the information, C exited
Applicant’s vehicle. (GE 2)  
EEO inquiry re: C’s discrimination charges
In response to C’s sexual harassment charges against Applicant and the city, the
city’s EEO conducted its own inquiry. The assigned EEO inspector asked Applicant
several questions pertaining to C’s harassment complaint, which drew untruthful
responses from Applicant. When the inspector asked Applicant whether he ever
4
socialized with C, Applicant answered “never.” (GEs 8 and 13) Asked whether he had
ever had any personal discussions with C over marriage and potential sexual
exchanges, he again said “never.” (GEs 8 and 13) He answered no, too, to the
inspector’s question of whether he ever received a massage from C, and to the question
of whether C had ever been in his city vehicle. (see GE 13) And Applicant answered in
the negative to the inspector’s question of whether Applicant ever discussed with C any
aspects of the pending investigation of her husband (B)
When later confronted by the police investigator detailed to his department’s own
internal investigation of Applicant’s reported actions, Applicant admitted to socializing
with C at a birthday party in May 2000 and having coffee with her on other occasions.
(see GE 12) After being confronted with C’s reporting of massages to Applicant,
Applicant acknowledged he received a massage to his shoulder from C. (GE 12)
However, he continued to deny more extended contacts with C, and denied any sexual
contact with C whatsoever. (GE 12) 
Besides interviewing Applicant, the police investigator assigned to investigate
Applicant’s role in the events claimed by C in her complaint, talked to some of C’s
coworkers in the fire and police dispatcher’s office.  One of C’s coworkers confirmed that
Applicant had made many calls to her office inquiring about C’s whereabouts. (GE 12).
This investigator also contrasted Applicant’s claims in his taped conversation with C
about his involvement in an ongoing investigation of B with his own understanding of the
absence of any ongoing investigation of B. (GE 12). Another of Applicant’s coworkers
confirmed that she had numerous personal conversations and social exchanges with him
following her employment in 1999. (GE 12) She claimed he made advances to her,
which she rebuffed. (GE 12). A social friend of C’s confirmed a three-way social
exchange between herself, C, and Applicant,  in which C’s opening of her massage
parlor became a topic of discussion. (GE 12) 
After reviewing Applicant’s taped conversation with C, the police investigator
found Applicant’s answers to the questions propounded to him to be false and untruthful
in many ways when compared to the accounts of C and the other witnesses interviewed.
(GE 13)  In his own conclusions, he confirmed that Applicant failed to cooperate with an
official EEO investigation and was untruthful about an official investigation initiated
against B in 2002. (GE 12) He underscored several police department rules and
regulations violated by Applicant: failure to maintain proper telephone courtesy with the
public; conduct unbecoming a police department employee; failure to abide by internal
police department rules of conduct; failure to adhere to the department’s anti-harassment
policy; failure to be truthful in a police investigation; and failure to safeguard the
confidentiality of police business. (see GEs 12 and 13).  
Based on his own internal findings with respect to a prior police investigation in
2002 and the current one involving his communications and relations with  C, this police
investigator recommended the termination of Applicant’s commission with the police
department and the forwarding of any further considered actions of discipline to the city’s
fire department. (GE 12) This police investigator repeated his findings concerning
Applicant responses to questions from the EEO inspector’s June 2003 interview with
5
Applicant when he met with the fire marshal (Applicant’s supervisor) in August 2003.
(see GE13) 
City’s Personnel and Administrative policies
The city’s personnel policies in place throughout the 2002 and 2003 periods of
Applicant’s employment required employees to avoid any form of unlawful discrimination
and be cooperative and truthful at all times with city investigators in administrative
investigations. (see GE 14) Rules of conduct governing the city’s fire and emergency
services personnel required every fire department member to behave in a self-disciplined
manner and be responsible to regulate his or her conduct with a positive, productive, and
mature attitude. 
Rules of conduct required city fire and emergency personnel to: follow all policies,
procedures, and written directives of the city; conduct themselves in a manner that will
reflect positively on the fire department; and operate safely and use good judgment
based on training and directives. (GE 14)   Violations of any of the city’s personnel and
administrative policies was cause for disciplinary action ranging from counseling up to
and including dismissal. (GE 14)
The city’s personnel policy included a section governing employee ethics. The
city’s ethics policy barred employees from using their positions for personal gain and
unwarranted benefit or treatment. Misuse of an employee’s official position was
prohibited by the ethics policy.  Improper use or disclosure of information gained from a
city employee’s employment that could result in a benefit to the employee or his family
was also prohibited by the city’s personnel policy. 
Applicant was fully briefed on the city’s personnel and administrative policies prior
to 2002.  Records document that Applicant received a copy of the city’s racial and sexual
harassment discrimination policy and training on sexual harassment in October 1996.
(GE 5). In May 2000, he acknowledged his receipt of the city’s revised employee
handbook. (GE 6).  This revised handbook covered the city’s work rules and personnel
policies for the city’s police and fire departments. (GE 6)  
City disciplinary actions taken against Applicant 
In August 2003, the city’s fire marshal (Applicant’s direct supervisor) and
investigating officer interviewed Applicant about the result of their internal investigation.
(GE 14).  In this interview, they challenged Applicant on the answers he provided the
EEO officer in his June 2003 interview of Applicant. In this interview, Applicant
characterized his answers in his June 2003 interview differently from the way he
responded in his June 2003 interview in a number of material respects. 
Finding irreconcilable inconsistencies in his statements, his supervisor concluded
that Applicant was not completely truthful in all of his responses. (GE 14) The fire
marshal also noted material inconsistencies in the accounts Applicant provided police
investigators in 2002 and those he furnished in his August 2003 interview. (GE 14)   
6
Based on his review of the evidence compiled in the city’s investigation,
Applicant’s supervisor concluded that Applicant’s comments to C in his taped
conversation with her in January 2003 were of a sexual nature and were designed to
appeal for some type of sexual favor or request. (GE 14) Finding Applicant’s telephone
conversation with C to have been conducted while he was on official city duty, he
determined Applicant’s sexual comments to have violated the city’s published
harassment policy.
Applicant’s supervisor also determined that Applicant used his position in an
inappropriate manner. (GE 14)  Having gained fire and police department information
through his official position, he shared this confidential information with C in his capacity
as a department inspector and investigator. His supervisor found Applicant’s actions to
reflect the appearance of preferential treatment and possible coercing of C to participate
in activities and/or gain information irrelevant to an investigation. Applicant’s supervisor
found Applicant’s actions as a commissioned law enforcement officer to constitute a use
of his position not related to job duties and responsibilities and indicative of poor
judgment and an abuse of position and power.  In the judgment of Applicant’s supervisor,
sharing information and using his position for personal gain in this manner violated the
city’s work rules and ethics policy. (GE 14)  
In the judgment of Applicant’s supervisor, Applicant’s actions also compromised
an ongoing investigation of A and B.  A and B were considered felony suspects at the
time, and Applicant’s contacts with B’s wife in these circumstances jeopardized the
potential outcome of the case in the view of Applicant’s supervisor. (GE 14) By sharing
investigative information with the wife of a suspect and compromising a felony case,
Applicant’s supervisor determined Applicant violated the city’s personnel and ethics
policies. (GE 14).  
After a thorough review of all of the evidence compiled by his department in its
internal investigation of Applicant’s conduct, Applicant’s supervisor concluded, too, that
Applicant’s conduct and behavior created questions regarding the impartiality and
objectivity of his performance as a city employee. (GE 14) By engaging in activity that is
prejudicial to the best interests of the city and its fire department, Applicant’s supervisor
determined Applicant violated the city’s personnel and ethics policies. (GE 14)   
Before deciding on his recommended course of disciplinary action for Applicant,
Applicant’s supervisor reviewed Applicant’s employment history. (GE 14) Applicant’s
history included a number of  prior disciplinary actions taken against him between July
1994 and February 2003.  
In recommending termination of Applicant’s city employment, Applicant’s
supervisor prefaced his recommendations with his characterizing of Applicant’s conduct.
He characterized Applicant’s collective actions as contrary to the expectations of his
department and city.  He stressed Applicant’s violations of numerous city policies, and
placing the city at an increased risk for liability.  Based on his review of the facts provided
through the course of the investigation, his supervisor concluded that Applicant
committed acts that were: untruthful during an administrative investigation; violated the
city’s sexual harassment policy; utilized his position in an inappropriate manner;
7
compromised a felony investigation; and participated in conduct prejudicial to the best
interests of the city. (GE 14) His supervisor, in turn recommended involuntary termination
from employment with the city’s fire department and city.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of his supervisor’s findings in September 2003.
(GE 14)  One week later, Applicant submitted his resignation. His resignation was
accepted by the city’s fire chief, and ultimately was accepted by the city in lieu of
involuntary termination. (see Ges 18 through 20)  
Applicant’s OPM interviews
In a September 2006 interview with an agent from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM), Applicant reviewed the history of his involvement in the
investigation of A and B for the city and his telling C about the investigation of her
husband as she sat in his parked city vehicle. (GE 2) He covered C’s harassment
complaint and his meeting with his supervisor and department investigator in September
2003. (GE 2)  However, Applicant denied most of the charges preferred against him by
his supervisor that led his supervisor to recommend his involuntary termination. His
denials were material and reflect ongoing rejection of his supervisor’s core findings about
Applicant’s untruthfulness during the investigation and the city’s claimed personnel and
ethics policies. (GE 2)  
OPM conducted a follow-up interview with Applicant in June 2008. (GE 4) As a
part of this interview, Applicant was asked to give a signed affidavit covering all of the
events and circumstances that gave rise to his 2003 resignation in lieu of termination.
Applicant provided a fairly detailed summary of most of the events leading up his
department’s investigation of his actions in his investigation of A and B.  His statement
covered his investigations of A and B and his acquaintance with C.  He acknowledged
sharing information with C about the ongoing investigation of her husband (citing the
likely guilt of her husband and his sympathy for her), and the ensuing harassment suit
she and B filed against D, himself, and the city. (GE 4)  Applicant also described his fire
department’s opened internal investigation as the result of C’s initiation of her lawsuit.
Applicant also mentioned C and Bs’ withdrawal of their lawsuit against the city, and his
department’s resumption of its internal investigation against B. So, too, he explained C’s
approaching him once again for information about his department’s renewed
investigation of her husband. (GE 4)  And he acknowledged C’s getting into his parked
city vehicle to inquire about the city’s investigation of B. 
But Applicant also omitted important details of his department’s internal
investigation of his actions and behavior as a fire investigator assigned to the
investigation of C’s husband, as well as the plausible, credible findings of his supervisor
that the latter used to recommend Applicant’s employment termination. Besides omitting
material details of his taped telephonic exchanges with C and his false denials when
questioned by a city EEO investigator, he reiterated his denials of all of C’s remaining
charges levied against him. He attributed his forced resignation to an absence of backing
by his supervisor and fire chief, and not to any wrongdoing on his part. (GE 4) And he
assured he tendered his resignation due to some poor choices on his part, and not
because he had committed any knowing and willful wrongdoing. (GE 4).
8
Based on Applicant’s own taped statements and the highly plausible and credible
inferences that the police investigator and his supervisor drew and used to base their
respective termination recommendations, Applicant’s limited explanations of the facts
and circumstances that led to his own decision to resign and avert involuntary
termination cannot be accepted as true and accurate accounts. Applicant’s explanations
lack completeness and material acknowledgments of the supported findings made by the
police investigator and his supervisor, and cited as the basis of their recommended
personnel actions against Applicant.
Applicant’s hearing accounts
In his hearing testimony, Applicant acknowledged being untruthful in the EEO
investigation about his relationship with C. With two exceptions, he accepted the findings
of his supervisor’s termination memorandum as an accurate portrayal of his actions. (Tr.
117-118) He denied any intentional misrepresentation about C’s getting into his city
vehicle, and he denied ever receiving a massage from C. (Tr. 109-10) 
Before A’s suicide in 2002, Applicant and C had been just good friends. (Tr. 92)
Their relationship changed, though, following A’s death. (Tr. 92-93) By the time Applicant
spoke to C in his taped 2003 telephone conversation, his marriage had deteriorated
considerably. (Tr. 98)  His marriage had been going “downhill for about ten years prior to
that” (Tr. 98), and had essentially ended in 2003.  He described his relationship with C at
that time as “better than friendly” (Tr. 98), and one that included physically affectionate
exchanges (e.g., hugging and kissing) without sexual intercourse. (Tr. 98-99) His
physically affectionate relationship with C had gone on for some two months before his
taped telephone conversation with her in 2003. (Tr. 103-04)  
Pressed at hearing to acknowledge he lied about the nature of his relationship
with C, Applicant admitted to giving an intentionally false account to the EEO investigator
of his relationship with her. (Tr. 108-09) He denied, however, ever receiving a massage
from C (Tr. 109-10), taking her for rides in his city vehicle, or intentionally failing to
disclose C’s getting into his city vehicle. (Tr. 111-16)
Because of the uncertainty he expressed in his EEO interview about C’s ever
getting into his city vehicle, his claims that he made no false claims about her ever
getting into his city vehicle may be accepted. A different inference is warranted, however,
in connection with his previous massage denials.  In light of his past pattern of denials of
any inappropriate social relationships with C, and his limited disclosures of inappropriate
behavior in his more recent OPM interviews, his repeated denial of his ever receiving a
massage from C is difficult to reconcile with his reported admission of a massage from C
in his interview with the city police investigator in 2003.  Before he was confronted by the
investigator and admitted to the massage, he denied receiving one from C then as well.
(see GE 12)
Based on a thorough consideration of the exhibits and testimony covering
Applicant’s EEO investigation and related resignation, Applicant’s assurances lack the
probative weight necessary to accept his denials at face value. More probative are the
findings of the police investigator who enlisted an admission from him that he received a
9
massage from C and Applicant’s supervisor who presented his findings supporting
Applicant’s recommended termination. After weighing all of the evidence, Applicant’s
claims to the contrary cannot be accepted.
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his current supervisor and coworkers. His
endorsements confirm numerous credits for his contributions to his team’s missions.
(see AE A and B)  Colleagues who have had considerable experience working with him
describe him as very conscientious and trustworthy. They credit him with demonstrated
courage, leadership, and outstanding performance in the execution of his assigned
responsibilities as a team leader.  (see AE E)  
Since joining his current employer, Applicant has never been charged or accused
of any kind of harassment in the work-place. Nor has he ever been suspended, or
reprimanded for any misconduct in the workplace, or subjected to any internal
investigations for misconduct in the workplace. (Tr. 188-19)  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well
as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability
to protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
10
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation of the Government's case. Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
11
Analysis  
Applicant is a high performing and well-regarded test engineer of a defense
contractor who resigned his city position as a fire inspector in 2003 in lieu of being
terminated for multiple actions violating the city’s personnel and ethics policies. Claiming
he resigned after he failed to receive any backing from his supervisor and the city’s fire
chief, Applicant consistently denied most of the charges against him and continued to
deny two cited instances of inappropriate behavior in his hearing testimony. Considered
together, Applicant’s actions create sufficient indicia of serious personal conduct
questions about his judgment and trustworthiness to raise security concerns under the
personal conduct guideline.
Because the judgment and trust lapses associated with the termination actions
instituted against him by his city employer in 2003 and ensuing denials in the face of
credible evidence supporting the findings of his supervisor involve honesty issues, they
pose personal conduct concerns. Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the
trust and reliability requirements for holding a security clearance are the actions and
repeated denials of Applicant that reflect serious abuses of his duties as a law
enforcement officer of his city’s fire department. Compounding the adverse findings
against him as a law enforcement officer are his subsequent denials and omissions of
key actions and events when afforded opportunities by OPM to provide complete and
accurate accountings of his underlying conduct. So much trust is imposed on persons
like Applicant who are cleared to see classified information that discounting actions that
reflect serious breaches of trust and candor are gauged very narrowly. 
Looking at the developed facts and circumstances in this case, two of the
disqualifying conditions under the personal conduct guideline are applicable to
Appellant’s situation.  DC ¶ 16(a), “ DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rules
violations,” and DC ¶ 16(d)(4), “evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer’s time or resources,” have application to the facts of Appellant’s case.  
Holding a security clearance, of course, involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. Trust in a
person’s willingness to follow and comply with rules and guidelines he may not
personally favor is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the
clearance.  Failure of the applicant to adhere to prescribed city personnel and ethical
policies and acknowledge inappropriate behavior when asked in official interviews
associated with ongoing city investigations raises security-significant concerns about the
sufficiency of the applicant’s demonstrated trust and judgment necessary to safeguard
classified information.
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with, since he has demonstrated a pattern
of attesting falsely to allegations made against him by persons associated with
investigations involving third parties, as well as those focused on his own actions as a
law enforcement officer.  When confronted by the investigating police officer of his city
employer, he initially denied any socializing with C (including massages administered by
C) before relenting and acknowledging the same when advised of documented tapes
12
and witness accounts. In his taped conversation with C, he mischaractered his
investigatory role in the investigation of B and was too specific in detailing the subject
matter of the investigation to C. By knowingly and willfully failing to disclose all of his
known exchanges with C when first interviewed by the EEO investigator, and later by the
city’s internal affairs investigator until confronted with compelling facts to the contrary.
Applicant concealed, or attempted to conceal, materially important background
information needed to complete the investigations mandated by his city employer. He
also compromised the integrity of any actual or potential investigation of B with the
details he supplied C in his taped conversation. 
Viewing Applicant’s conduct in its entirety, his actions not only violated his
employer’s harassment, personnel, and ethics policies, but they illustrate material
breaches of sound judgment and trust imposed on law enforcement officials.  Applicant’s
proven actions also demonstrate Applicant’s unwillingness and reluctance to provide full
cooperation to both city investigators examining his involvement with C back in 2003,
and DoD in its more recent efforts to ascertain Applicant’s worthiness to hold a security
clearance
Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his actions while employed as a
city fire inspector and ensuing denials in his more recent OPM interviews, even after
acknowledging receipt of his supervisor’s findings in September 2003, Applicant‘s
actions reflect a material breach of recognized tenets of trust and candor. His failure to
provide prompt, good-faith accounts of his actions when afforded multiple opportunities
to do so, undercuts his ability to successfully mitigate security concerns.
When addressing past actions that reflect proven dishonest and inappropriate
behavior and an applicant’s  repeated denials of the same, the Appeal Board has
construed such denials as self-serving claims, and when considered in light of other
instances of trust and judgment lapses, determined them to undermine applicant efforts
to demonstrate rehabilitation. See ISCR Case No. 08-03620 at 3-4 (App. Bd May 6,
2000); ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010).  
Based on a careful review of the administrative record, Applicant may partially rely
on two of the mitigating conditions (MC) of the personal conduct guideline.  Specifically,
MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense if so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, or good judgment,” and  MC ¶
17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change
the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other  inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur,” have some applicability to Applicant’s situation.
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’s actions and contributions to the
defense industry warrant positive assessments. Certainly, during his extended time with
his defense employer since he resigned from his city employment in 2003, he displayed
responsible conduct and has earned the trust and reliability of his current supervisor and
coworkers. At the same time, the investigation records from his former city employer and
13
ensuing OPM interviews reflect serious judgment and trust flaws that cannot be
discounted under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence in these types of situations.
While encouraging, Applicant’s favorable character evidence and demonstrated
contributions with his current employer are not enough to fully mitigate security concerns
over the mistakes of judgment and trust he displayed as a fire inspector with his former
city employer. Mitigation is further weakened by Applicant’s continued refusals to
acknowledge all of the proven incidents and coverups developed by his city employer’s
EEO and internal affairs investigations. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to
the  allegations covered by the personal conduct guideline.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a                                 Against   Applicant
                                                    Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                         
                                                                                     
                                                   Roger C. Wesley
                                                Administrative Judge                  
                                                    
14
                                                
