                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-18245
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Stuart Leeds, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
W ESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On May 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 22, 2010. The case was assigned to me
on June 14, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on July 22, 2010.  A hearing was held
on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of 10 exhibits
2
(GE).  All of the Government’s exhibits were admitted.  Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and no exhibits (AE). The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 29, 2010. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) incurred one adverse judgment
(subparagraph 1.a) in the amount of $4,018 and (b) accumulated 15 delinquent debts
exceeding $61,000. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted one of the
allegations (subparagraph 1.a) and denied the remaining ones. He provided no
explanations.
Procedural issues
After the hearing, Applicant submitted a post-hearing settlement offer and
documented repayment check with the judgment creditor covered by subparagraph 1.a.
Department Counsel did not object to this post-hearing submission, and for good cause
shown, the submission was admitted as AE A. Applicant later submitted documentation
of his settlement of the debt covered by subparagraph 1.h and his involvement with a
local charity in disaster preparedness. These exhibits, while filed out of time, were not
objected to by Department Counsel and were admitted for good cause shown as AEs B
and C.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old simulations interactor for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The only allegation covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant is adopted as a relevant and material finding.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married W1 in December 1970. (GE. 1). Applicant divorced W1 in
September 1978. (GE. 1). Shortly thereafter, Applicant married W2.  He has two children
(since emancipated) from this marriage. (Tr. 68) He divorced her in September 1987.
(GE. 1)  Applicant married W3 in 1989 and has no children from this marriage. (GE 1)
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1969. (GE 1; Tr. 66) He claims no
completed college credits. (GE 1) In November 1970, he enlisted in the U.S. Army and
served 20 years of active duty before his honorable discharge in December 1990. (GE.
1; Tr. 34, 66-67)  
Between 1992 and 1999, Applicant worked as a data collection for a contractor
responsible for missile systems development. (GE 1; Tr. 35-36) In this position, he held a
security clearance. When his employer’s contract ended in 1999, Applicant joined
another contractor with missile defense development responsibilities (Tr. 37), and was
ultimately laid off by this contractor in September 2000 after his employer lost its
government contract. (GE 1; Tr. 71)  He was out of work for approximately nine months
before he secured a position as a truck driver. (GE 1; Tr. 71-72)  
3
Between May 2000 and February 2003, Applicant worked for another defense
contractor.  When his company’s contract expired, Applicant became unemployed again.
He was unemployed for about 18 months before he secured a job with another defense
contractor in 2004. (Tr. 72-73, 102) Applicant worked for several defense contractors
between 2003 and 2006 (each requiring a security clearance). In each of his jobs, he
made less money than he was accustomed to making, even after his unemployment
benefits expired. (Tr. 41, 102). He experienced no identifiable financial setbacks between
2004 and the present that he could document. (GE 1; Tr. 38-42)  
Applicant’s finances 
During his recurrent periods of unemployment, Applicant drew unemployment
benefits (Tr. 37), and fell further behind in his debts. He had already stopped paying his
debts following his 2001 layoff, and fell even further behind with his creditors after his
2003 layoff. (see GE 8; Tr. 73-74)  Altogether, Applicant accumulated delinquencies with
16 of his creditors for more than $61,000. One of these debts is a judgment that creditor
1.a obtained in May 2006 for $4,018. Applicant claims no knowledge of the initiated suit
against him prior to June 2006. (GE 8) His first notice of creditor 1.a’s suit against him,
and scheduled default hearing, came in a registered letter he received in 2006. (Tr. 76)
Applicant did not respond to the notice or take any action to prevent the judgment from
being entered against him. (Tr. 78)
Applicant consulted a bankruptcy lawyer in 2004 and was told that most of the
debts were charged off, and the remaining ones would be charged off. (Tr. 74) Applicant
relied on his lawyer’s advice and initiated no repayment actions on his debts. (GE 6).
Today, he claims a number of the listed debts (specifically, creditors 1.f, 1.i, and 1.l) in
the SOR are duplicates of others in the SOR (viz., creditors 1.c, 1.e, and 1.k), but
provides no documentary proof. (Tr. 83-86)  He also claims he tried to contact the listed
creditors but found no creditor willing to work with repayment plans. (Tr. 80-83)
Of the remaining listed debts in the SOR, Applicant recognized only creditors 1.a,
1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.n through 1.p. He was never able to complete any repayment
arrangements with most of these creditors, and has made only limited payments and
payment offers to any of these creditors since the accounts became delinquent.  
Beginning in 2006, Applicant received letters from a number of his creditors
seeking collection of the delinquent balances, including the judgment creditor covered by
subparagraph 1.a. (GE 6)  Still, Applicant refused to pay any of his listed creditors. He
continues to treat most of these delinquent debts as charged off accounts and has made
few concerted attempts to address these creditors prior to the hearing.  (see GE 6 and
AEs A and B; Tr. 101)
In October 2010, Applicant completed a payment arrangement with the judgment
creditor covered by subparagraph 1.a.  Under the terms of his payment arrangement, he
was required to remit the sum of $2,300 to the judgment creditor by September 24, 2010
to settle this judgment debt. Applicant documents his paying the required settlement sum
in September 2010 in full satisfaction of the entered judgment. (see AE A) Applicant also
4
documented his settlement of his creditor 1.h debt to the satisfaction of the listed
creditor. (AE B) His remaining debts covered in the SOR remain either unpaid,
unresolved, or not credibly disputed.
Applicant currently nets around $2,600 a month from his work and receives an
additional $1,300 a month from his service retirement. (see GE 8; Tr. 70-71, 91-92) His
wife nets around $500 a month in social security benefits. (Tr. 92) 
Applicant owns a 2008 Dodge truck; while W3 owns a 2005 Cadillac. (Tr.93-94)
He and W3 own a home and make monthly mortgage payments of $720 on the home.
Applicant has a net monthly remainder of about $935 (GE 8), and he has $14,000 in his
401(k) retirement account. (Tr. 100) He assures that he is current with his state and
federal taxes.  Without any available payment plans, he is not in a position to address
any of his remaining delinquent debts.  (Tr. 101)  
Community service
In June 1998, Applicant participated in local disaster preparedness efforts in his
community. His efforts were sponsored and recognized by a respected charitable
organization. (see ex. C) He provided no endorsements from his employment, however,
or performance evaluations.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
5
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge
cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
6
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a senior simulations interactor for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts (to include an adverse judgment) during
recurrent periods of unemployment between 2001 and 2004. His accumulation of
delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address these debts
warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines:
DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶ 19(c) “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his inability to find well-paying work
following his layoff in December 2001. After credits for the two debts he has since
settled, his unpaid and unresolved delinquent debts still exceed $50,000.
Based on the documented materials in the record, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve
most of his debts. Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.”
Moreover, some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s unexplained
continuing delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in
addressing his listed debts once the underemployment conditions that contributed to
the delinquencies had passed or eased, and his finances had improved.  See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004).  Not only are his listed debt
delinquencies ongoing, but he has failed to address most of them in any tangible way. 
To be sure, most of Applicant’s listed debts appear to have been placed in
collection before 2002, and are likely barred by his state’s controlling statute of
limitations. The only clear exception are the creditor 1.a judgment debt and 1.h
consumer debt that he has since satisfied.  None of Applicant’s remaining delinquent
debts reflect any collection action by the individual creditors involved.  Based on this
record, most of Applicant’s covered debts appear to be barred from collection by the
pertinent four-year statute of limitation in his state of domicile. See §§16.004(c) and
16.051 (statute of limitations for contracts) and (statute of limitations for debts) of T.
Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code.
Statutes of limitation, while considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation, have never
been equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors in security clearance
7
jurisprudence. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(citing
ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001). Still, they provide effective
collection barriers and, like bankruptcy, serve to insulate the debtor from pressures to
raise cash to satisfy his or her creditors.
Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed
in this record.  Extenuating  circumstances are not sufficiently shown by Applicant to
justify relieving him of his payment responsibilities once he returned to full-time
employment in 2004.  While his state’s statute of limitations may protect him from any
collection enforcement by any of his outstanding creditors, it does not excuse his
judgment lapses associated with his failure to make any documented efforts to pay or
resolve his debts before or after they became time-barred.  
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts when
able to do so raises security-significant concerns about whether the applicant has
demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to address them
in a timely way once he returned to the active work force in 2004. Resolution of his
delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his maintaining control of his  finances.
Payment of two of his accounts following the hearing, while commendable, is not
enough to credit him with restoring his finances to stable levels, commensurate with
holding a security clearance.   
While unemployment conditions played a considerable role in his accumulation
of so many debts over a relatively short period, Applicant failed to provide sufficient
explanations for his failure to address them after he returned to the active work force.
Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making a
whole-person assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided.
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant does not enable him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s recurrent periods of unemployment, his debt accumulations, and his failure
to address them before the hearing, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his debts and restore his finances to
stable levels commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a security
clearance.
8
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.b through 1.g and 1.i through 1.p.  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.h are
mitigated.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  AGAINST APPLICANT
   
       Subparas. 1.b, through 1.g and 1.i through 1.p: Against Applicant
       Subparas.  1.a and 1.h:        For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
