KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence or vice versa.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-08373.a1
DATE: 12/03/2010
DATE: December 3, 2010
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-08373
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 6, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
2
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 21, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious or contrary to law.  Specifically, Applicant points out his excellent job performance, work
ethic, and military record.  He contends that the Judge should have accorded greater weight to his
evidence of mitigation, and he argues that loss of his job will hinder his efforts to improve his
financial situation.    
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 37 years old and is employed
as a security officer.  Applicant has an excellent job performance record and is highly thought of by
his coworkers and his supervisor.  
In its SOR, the government alleged under Guideline F that Applicant owed about $26,139
for 14 delinquent debts more than 90 days past due.  Applicant admitted all of the debts, but asserted
that three of the 14 had been paid or otherwise satisfied.  Applicant has used debt consolidation and
debt counseling firms within the last two years, but there is no record of payments being made under
those services.  Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the legal fees he accrued in defending
himself against the criminal charges listed below.     
The five SOR allegations under Guideline J relate to domestic violence, all but one involving
his relationships with two women.  Girlfriend 1 called the police after an argument in May 2007,
and Applicant was charged with domestic violence/harassment and convicted.  Applicant was
ordered to pay a fine of $300 and attend a domestic violence intervention program, and he received
a 60-day suspended sentence and was placed on probation for 24 months.  When Applicant appealed
to the  circuit court, the case was dismissed because Girlfriend 1did not cooperate with the
prosecutors.  Later in May 2007, Applicant was investigated for harassing communications toward
Girlfriend 1, and a protective order was issued.  In September 2007, Applicant was charged with and
convicted of violating the protective order.  Applicant was sentenced to 60 days in jail (suspended),
placed on probation for 12 months, fined, and assessed court costs.  Applicant listed the above
offenses on his security clearance application, but denied that he was guilty of the charges.
Applicant admitted a domestic violence charge by Girlfriend 2 in December 2006.  Applicant was
not prosecuted, but he agreed to attend an eight-week violence intervention program.  When
Applicant completed his security clearance application in February 2008, he was awaiting trial on
two charges–violation of a protective order and domestic violence/harassment.  At the time of the
hearing, Applicant was still awaiting trial on another domestic violence charge dating from
December 2009. 
In support of his appeal, Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from Girlfriend 1.
The Board cannot consider that letter, since it constitutes new evidence.  See Directive, ¶ E3.l.29.
See also ISCR Case No. 08-06875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).  Applicant submitted a second set
of new documents after his brief was accepted.  The Board cannot consider these either. 
3
Applicant contends that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law,
arguing that the Judge did not consider or did not give adequate weight to his excellent job
performance, work ethic, and military record.  Applicant also maintains that the Judge should have
accorded greater weight to his attempts to settle his debts and his explanations for his criminal
record.  There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence, unless
the Judge specifically states otherwise; and there is no requirement that the Judge mention or discuss
every piece of record evidence when reaching a decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08134 at 3
(App. Bd. May 16, 2005).   In this case, the Judge mentioned Applicant’s excellent performance and
reputation at work, as well as his military record.  The Judge also discussed Applicant’s attempts
to improve his financial situation and found in Applicant’s favor as to eight of the fourteen
Guideline F allegations.  However, the application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and
whole-person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has
to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23384 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2007).
Applicant states that loss of his job due to denial of a security clearance will have an adverse
impact on his ability to improve his financial situation.  However, the effect that an adverse decision
may have on an applicant is not a relevant or material consideration in evaluating his or her security
eligibility.  See, e.g.,ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009). 
After reviewing the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).   “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision  is sustainable.  
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
