 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11772 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 8, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns created 
by his delinquent tax debt. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on September 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 8, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information until close of business 
November 5, 2010. Applicant submitted AE G through AE M, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 1, 2010.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on September 24, 2010, Department Counsel made a motion to 
amend the SOR, in order to conform to the evidence, by adding ¶¶1.b., through 1.d., 
pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. These allegations were part of the SOR dated April 30, 
2010, however neither the administrative judge’s file nor the department counsel’s file 
contained a complete copy of the original SOR. Applicant had no objections to the 
amendment and previously admitted these allegations in his Answer. In an abundance 
of caution, the motion to amend was granted. (Tr. 33-34.) The allegations are as 
follows: 
 
1.b. You are indebted to Elitrecserv for an account that has been placed 
for collection by HSBC in the approximate amount of $2,012.00. As of the 
date of this Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid. 
 
1.c. You are indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for a tax lien 
entered against you in June 2004 in the approximate amount of 
$7,745.00. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid. 
 
1.d. You are indebted to a creditor identified as medical account #563255 
on your credit report dated May 08, 2008 in the approximate amount of 
$101.00. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations. After a through and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never been 
married and has no children. Both of his parents passed away by the time he was eight-
years old. He was raised by his grandparents. He is a college graduate, with a degree in 
industrial technology. (GE 1; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 Applicant has had a tumultuous past, involving an addiction to drugs and alcohol 
in the late 1980’s. In 1999, he was incarcerated for 51 days in county jail after he was 
convicted for shoplifting. During the same time frame, he became involved in Alcoholics 
Anonymous and he has been sober since May 17, 1999. He received recovery 
assistance through a residential recovery house, which he volunteers with currently. He 
serves on the board of directors for the recovery house, and from 2004-2007, he was 
the President of the board. He is also a Mason Shiner. (GE 1; Tr. 42-52.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has a long history of failing to satisfy his Federal tax obligations in a 
timely manner. A statement from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) shows a tax lien, 
filed in February 1997, against Applicant for tax years 1986, 1989-1991, and 1994. It 
was released in June 2008. As alleged in SOR allegation 1.a., Applicant is indebted to 
the IRS for a tax lien entered against him in February 2009, in the approximate amount 
of $14,306. Further, as alleged in SOR allegation 1.c., an IRS tax lien was filed against 
the Applicant in June 2004 and released in August 2007. Applicant did not pay that 
debt. He believes that the $7,745 debt on the 2004 released tax lien was added to the 
present lien, totaling $14,306. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 8; AE A; Tr. 
36-39, 54-74, 79-80, 84.) 
 
 Applicant has been in communication with the IRS over his tax debt. In 2003, he 
attempted to resolve his delinquent tax obligations through an offer in compromise. It 
was rejected. There is no evidence that from 2003 to 2007, he took any further actions 
on his tax debt. In 2007, he again sought an offer in compromise. He was informed that 
his tax account was in an “uncollectible status” and would be “released by 2014.” 
Therefore, he made no payments on his debt. On October 1, 2010, five months after 
receiving the SOR, he sent the IRS a new offer in compromise, proposing to pay the 
IRS $300 per month. The IRS responded on October 25, 2010, requesting Applicant 
complete additional documentation. On October 26, 2010, he sent in the necessary 
paperwork to process his proposed offer in compromise. Applicant failed to provide 
documentation establishing if the offer in compromise had been accepted by the IRS by 
close of the record. He attributes his tax debt to “understating his taxes” on his income 
tax returns. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 8; AE A; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; 
AE K; AE L; AE M; Tr. 36-39, 54-74, 79-80, 84.) 
 
 Applicant was also indebted to a collection service for a credit card in the 
approximate amount of $2,012, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. Applicant incurred 
this debt in approximately 2003 when he was laid off for a period of approximately nine 
months. On August 3, 2009, Applicant settled this account with the creditor for a 
payment of $700. He introduced a letter from the creditor that advised the account was 
now settled. (GE 2; AE B; Tr. 81-82.) 
 
 Allegation 1.d. alleged that Applicant was indebted on a medical account in the 
approximate amount of $101. This debt was incurred when Applicant bounced a check 
to a hospital. Applicant presented documentation from the hospital that in February 
2008, he satisfied this account in full. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 82.) 
 
 Applicant has no additional past due delinquent accounts. He currently has 
savings of approximately $3,500 and total assets of $57,855. He has a net remainder of 
$111 after his monthly bills are paid. His monthly remainder does not take into account 
his proposed payment of $300 per month to the IRS. (GE 8; AE H; Tr. 87-88.) 
 
 Applicant presented a letter from his friend and accountant that indicated 
Applicant was an “upstanding individual.” He has been recognized for his “commitment 
and hard work” by his employer. (AE A; AE E; AE F.) 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations with respect to the 
IRS. He has had a number of tax liens filed against him and currently owes the IRS 
$14,306. From his personal financial statement, it does not appear that he has the 
means to satisfy his debt, with a remainder of only $111 per month. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Further inquiry about 
the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not acted responsibly, or in a timely manner, to attempt to resolve 
his delinquent Federal tax debt. After his 2003 attempt to resolve the debt through an 
offer in compromise, he ignored the debt until 2007. In 2007, instead of paying his 
obligation, he chose to rely on the statute of limitations that would eventually apply. His 
debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under Appeal Board precedent.1 He did not 
resolve his delinquent tax debts through payment, establish payment plans, or dispute 
the debt. Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant‘s debt alleged in 1.b. resulted from his layoff in 2003. He was laid off 
for a nine month period and unable to make his credit card payments. However, he did 
not produce documentation showing his delinquent tax debts were affected by this 
period of unemployment. There is no evidence to suggest that his tax lien resulted in 
any circumstances beyond his control. Further, his inaction on his tax debt does not 
show he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is only partially 
mitigating. 
 
 Applicant did not present any evidence of financial counseling. Further, his 
financial problems are not resolved or under control, despite having satisfied SOR 
allegations 1.b and 1.d. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has made a good faith effort to satisfy the creditors in SOR allegations 
1.b. and 1.d. However, the same cannot be said with respect to his Federal tax debt. He 
did not adequately demonstrate his efforts to pay the tax debt when his first offer in 
compromise was rejected. Instead, he relied on the fact that the debt would eventually 
expire. The Appeal Board has long held that reliance on the statute of limitations as a 
defense is not normally a substitute for good-faith efforts to pay off a debt.2 While he is 
currently attempting to negotiate an offer in compromise with the IRS, it does not appear 
that Applicant has the funds available to satisfy his proposed agreement, should the IRS 
accept the proposal. AG ¶ 20(d) only applies in part. 
 
 Applicant does not dispute the legitimacy of his debt to the IRS. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008), citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 
16, 2002). 
2 ISCR Case No. 07-16427 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 2010). 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has had numerous challenges in life that he has persevered through. 
He is well respected by his friend and has made significant contributions to our society 
through his community service. However, he has failed to show that he is responsible 
with respect to his financial obligations. His federal tax debt is large and he does not 
have the funds to satisfy his debt. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
