 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04149 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan K. Hahn, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption; however, he failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 17, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I.  Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A-C, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations except for SOR 
¶ 3.d. I have adopted these admissions in my findings of fact, and after a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I also make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is divorced and has no children. Since March 2005, 
he has worked as a systems engineer for a defense contractor. He has a high school 
diploma and is taking some college courses. He joined the Navy in 1995 and remained 
on active duty for 10 years. He served on several overseas deployments while in the 
Navy. He was honorably discharged in the pay grade of E-6.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana, from about 
1983 (when he was 15 years old) to  January 2007 (admitted); (2) consuming alcohol, to 
the point of intoxication, from about 1982 (when he was 13 years old) to 2008 
(admitted); (3) receiving treatment for alcohol dependence in September 2007 from an 
alcohol treatment hospital (admitted); (4) consuming alcohol after his participation in an 
alcohol recovery program (admitted); (5) using marijuana after being granted a security 
clearance and (6) making multiple false statements on February 8, 2007, on his security 
clearance application about his past drug use; and making a false statement on March 
6, 2008, to an investigator, also about his past drug use (admitted, except for the 
statement to an investigator). 
  
 When Applicant was 13 years old and through his high school years, he and a 
friend drank alcohol about once every two weeks. Most of the time they drank beer, but 
sometimes they also drank liquor. After high school, Applicant’s use of alcohol slowed to 
about once every two or three months. In November 2004, Applicant increased his 
alcohol use to about eight to twelve ounces of liquor per day. He mostly drank at home 
by himself. He frequently became intoxicated. There were several reasons for his 
increased consumption. First, he was going through a divorce; second he was leaving 
the Navy and looking for a job; and third, his father was ill.2  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-23, 45; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 29-30; GE 4, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant voluntarily entered an alcohol treatment center. He 
spent two weeks as an inpatient followed by six weeks in outpatient treatment. He 
believes he was diagnosed as alcohol dependant. Since his treatment, he has 
consumed a minimal amount of alcohol. He quantifies the amount at about one glass of 
wine per year. His last drink was on New Year’s Eve 2009. He has never been arrested 
nor had any legal trouble resulting from his use of alcohol. From this point forward, he 
intends to totally abstain from alcohol.3  
 
 Similar to his use of alcohol, Applicant started using marijuana at a young age. 
Between the ages of 15 and 18, he used marijuana for recreational purposes about 
three to four times a week. From the ages 18 to 24, he used marijuana about two to 
three times a month. In 1994, He stopped using marijuana as he prepared for his 
enlistment into the Navy. He did not use marijuana during his Navy career. After he was 
out of the Navy, in May 2005, Applicant was at a friend’s house and was offered 
marijuana. He used marijuana by inhaling from a pipe, but he did not like the taste so he 
did not use it again. The reason he used marijuana was out of curiosity. In January 
2007, Applicant had some friends over to watch a football game and someone offered 
him marijuana. He used the marijuana one time by smoking from a pipe, but again did 
not like the taste so he did not use it again. He worked for his current defense contractor 
employer and held a security clearance both times he used marijuana. At the times he 
used marijuana, his employer had a company policy against using drugs and he was 
aware of that policy.4  
 
 On February 8, 2007, Applicant certified his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investgations Processing (e-QIP). In response to “Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs 
and Drug Activity”, Applicant answered negatively to whether he had ever used any 
controlled substance (including marijuana) in the last seven years, and negatively to 
whether he had ever used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance. On March 6, 2008, Applicant prepared a sworn affidavit where he discussed 
his past drug use, alcohol use, and medical treatment. While he discussed his pre-Navy 
marijuana use, he failed to disclose his marijuana use in May 2005 and January 2007. 
During his testimony, Applicant stated that the reason he did not disclose this 
information on either his e-QIP or in his March 6, 2008, affidavit was because he 
rationalized his minimal uses and therefore did not think he needed to disclose them.5  
 
 Applicant is supported by three character letters attesting to his honesty, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. Applicant is viewed as a valued employee and loyal 
friend.6 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 31-33, 71-74; GE 4, 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 25-27, 33, 56-70; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-34; GE 1, 5. 
 
6 AE A-C. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 Appellant used marijuana on multiple occasions before 1995 and more recently 
in 2005 and 2007 while holding a security clearance. I find that both the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Most of Applicant’s marijuana use was remote and would otherwise have been 
mitigated by the passage of time except that he recently used marijuana again in 2005 
and 2007. Appellant’s recent use although infrequent (two uses), occurred while he held 
a security clearance. He was well aware of his responsibilities not to engage in illegal 
drug use pursuant to his company’s drug policy and as a former member of the United 
States Navy. Despite this knowledge, Appellant still engaged in illegal drug abuse. 
Appellant was 36 and 38 years old when he most recently used marijuana. His 
willingness to use marijuana casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. Even though Appellant stated his intent not to use drugs in the future, 
sufficient time has not passed to conclude that he has demonstrated an intent not to 
 
6 
 
 
abuse drugs. His history shows he gave up marijuana before, while in the Navy, only to 
use it again shortly after his discharge. I find that neither of the above mitigating 
circumstance fully applies.       
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One is applicable in this case: 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 Applicant’s pattern of drinking through September 2007 and his voluntary 
seeking of alcohol rehabilitation treatment support the application of AG ¶ 22(c). 
Although Applicant entered an alcohol treatment program, there was no formal 
diagnosis rendered by a qualified medical professional offered by the government.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 Applicant recognized that alcohol was causing problems in his life and voluntarily 
entered an alcohol treatment program. Applicant did not have any alcohol incidents at 
work or that caused him to be arrested. After his treatment, Applicant significantly 
limited his consumption of alcohol to about one glass of wine a year. I find Applicant 
acknowledged that he had an alcohol problem, took action to address the problem, and 
thereafter, committed himself to very limited alcohol use. I find AG ¶ 23(b) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s use of marijuana on two occasions while holding a security clearance 
created a vulnerability to his personal standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies to SOR ¶ 3.a. 
Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose his 2005 and 2007 marijuana uses on both 
his e-QIP in February 2007 and during his March 2008 interview. He rationalized his 
non-disclosure by viewing the uses as limited and therefore inconsequential. I find 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his most recent marijuana uses. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies to SOR ¶¶ 3.b and 3.c; and AG ¶ 16(b) applies to SOR ¶ 3.d. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 I have considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Appellant’s drug 
use while holding a security clearance and his false statements. Neither are minor 
offenses and both cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness. Nothing about Applicant’s 
actions reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) 
and (e) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
have considered Appellant’s honorable service in the Navy. I considered his alcohol 
recovery efforts. However, I am concerned with Appellant’s lack of honesty when he 
failed to disclose his recent marijuana use while holding a security clearance. This was 
not the case of someone making a youthful mistake. Applicant was in his mid-30s when 
he resumed using marijuana after ten years of naval service and non-use. He was also 
aware of his company’s policy about drug use when he recently used marijuana. 
Appellant’s actions raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Appellant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Appellant has mitigated Alcohol Consumption security concerns, but has not 
mitigated the concerns raised under both the Drug Involvement guideline and the 
Personal Conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.d:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
