                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06388 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 10, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on August 6, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
it was received on August 20, 2010. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case was assigned to 
me on November 2, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He also owns his 
own business. He was married in 1978 and divorced in 1991. He has two children from 
the marriage, born in 1983 and 1987. He remarried in 1992 and has one child born in 
1995. Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on May 21, 2009. 
 
 Applicant admitted he is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for 
federal tax liens listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e, filed in July 2008, May 
2008, July 2007, April 2005, and January 2003, totaling approximately $175,688. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated he is in negotiation with the IRS to satisfy the 
debts. He did not provide any evidence that he has paid or resolved these debts.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($437) is for a past-due mortgage payment on a balance 
of $36,106. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated this debt is “up to date and 
current.” He also stated the debt “will be paid up to date on June 10, [2010].”1 He did not 
provide any documentation to support that the debt is paid or up to date.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($3,485) is a credit card debt. Applicant admitted the debt 
in his answer and stated the balance owed is “$400 and will be paid in full on June 15, 
[2010].” Applicant provided a document from the collection company indicating a 
balance of $1,641.07 and offering to accept this amount as payment in full, if payment 
was received by May 28, 2010. There is a handwritten note at the bottom of the 
document, presumably written by Applicant, indicating that the settlement would be paid 
on June 15, [2010]. In his statement to the OPM investigator, Applicant denied this was 
his debt, claiming it belonged to his former spouse and she was responsible for it. In his 
answer to interrogatories, he indicated he placed a hold on the account and was paying-
off the debt in installments. Applicant credit bureau report indicates that this is an 
“individual” account owned by him. He did not provide any documentation to support the 
debt is paid.2  
 
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 4, 6, 7, 8, 9. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i ($83 and $309) are collection accounts. 
Applicant provided documentation the debts were paid on May 12, 2010, and May 17, 
2010, respectively.3  
 
 Applicant did not disclose his delinquent federal income tax liens on his SCA. On 
August 6, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator. He expressed surprise and stated he had no knowledge about any 
of the federal taxes that were in arrears. He claimed he had a life-long problem of 
identity theft. He did recall that several years ago he received a notice from the IRS 
advising him of a large tax debt. He stated his wife contacted the IRS and resolved the 
issue. He advised the investigator that he was up-to-date on all of his federal taxes and 
that his current financial situation was good. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
“I was not aware that these things existed on my credit report at the time of the original 
questionnaire.”4 In his answer to interrogatories Applicant stated: “We have since the 
interview found out the debt belongs to old taxes/penalties not paid.”5 No other 
explanation or information was provided.6  
 
 Applicant lived at the same residence from 2004 to the present. Prior to 2004, he 
lived at the same residence from 1997 to 2004. His former residence is on the same 
street as his present residence.7  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
3 Item 4 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Item 7. 
 
6 Item 4, 6. 
 
7 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $179,610. The 
debts date back to at least 2003 and they are not paid or resolved. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admits he owes all the SOR alleged debts. He paid the two debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i. The remaining debts are unpaid and unresolved. Applicant’s federal 
tax debts date back to 2003. Applicant had an opportunity to provide documentation that 
he paid or made payments towards the delinquent debts, but failed to do so. He has not 
provided information that the financial problems were beyond his control. He has not 
provided evidence that he received financial counseling, has made good-faith 
payments, except as noted, or that the problem is being resolved. Although he 
apparently disputed one debt that he stated belonged to his former spouse, the 
evidence is to the contrary, and he indicated he was going to pay it. Applicant did not 
provide evidence as to why he failed to pay his federal taxes and incurred tax liens 
imposed since 2003. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct.  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant indicated to the OPM investigator that he was surprised he had federal 
tax liens. However, he was aware of a notice from the IRS several years ago about a 
large tax debt. He stated he believed his wife resolved it. Applicant’s tax liens date back 
to 2003, and each one is for a substantial amount. He has lived at the same residence 
since 2004. He claimed in his interview that he was up-to-date on all of his federal 
taxes. The liens are for $18,760, $46,223, $38,854, $31,681, and $40,170. It is common 
knowledge that the IRS sends many notices to taxpayers about discrepancies and 
delinquencies regarding their taxes. I have considered all of the statements made by 
Applicant to the OPM investigator. After considering the available evidence, I find 
Applicant’s statements that he was unaware he had any tax debts are not credible. I find 
he intentionally failed to disclose his tax liens. Applicant chose to have his case 
determined on the record, so I have not had the opportunity to ask him questions. He 
had an opportunity to explain how he accumulated numerous tax liens, but he failed to 
provide additional information. I find the above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant did not make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his omission before 
being confronted with the facts. The omissions are serious and not minor, and cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I have considered 
all of the evidence and conclude none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E, in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 52 years old. He owes approximately $179,610 in delinquent federal taxes 
and other debts. He has not provided documentation he has paid or resolved these 
debts. In May 2010, he paid two small debts that had been in collection. He made 
assertions that certain debts were going to be paid by certain dates, but did not provide 
documents to support his assertions. He provided no explanation for how he 
accumulated over $175,000 in federal tax liens and failed to pay them. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion and mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
