 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08744 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2010, and August 30, 2010, and elected 
to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on September 29, 2010. A complete copy of 
 
2 
 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received a copy of the FORM on October 8, 2010. She 
answered the FORM on November 18, 2010. On November 22, 2010, she sent a 
revised response to the FORM and indicated she sent the previous version by mistake. 
The second submission contains the same information as the first submission with 
some added information that is not in the first submission. Applicant did not object to the 
admission of the items attached to the FORM, and they are admitted. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response, and it is admitted. The case was 
assigned to me on November 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is applying for 
a security clearance for the first time. Her Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), 
submitted in February 2009, listed that she has worked for her current employer since 
December 2008, she has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2004, and she has 
never been married. She has a young child that was born after the SF 86 was 
submitted.1  
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts with balances totaling about $13,872. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR but stated the balances on 
several of the debts were less than what was alleged in the SOR. She also submitted 
additional evidence in support of her application for a security clearance. Except as 
specifically stated below, the allegations were established through credit reports and 
Applicant’s admissions. 
 
 Applicant incurred debt while she was in college and the first few years in the 
workforce. Her SF 86 shows that she was employed from June 2004 through August 
2008 and unemployed September 2008 through November 2008. She began to address 
her financial issues after she obtained her current job and realized that her finances 
could have an impact on her security clearance and ability to maintain employment. She 
paid or settled a few small debts that were not alleged in the SOR ($175, $64, and 
$32).2 
 
 Applicant stated that she made payment arrangements with several of the 
creditors and started payment plans. She provided documentation in her response to 
DOHA interrogatories that she made the first payment of $50 toward the $248 utility 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in February 2010. In her response to the SOR, she stated the 
balance on the debt was $173. She did not provide documentation of any additional 
payments.3  
 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 7; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
2 Items 3, 8-13; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
3 Items 8-10. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that she paid $75 toward the $214 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in February 2010. She stated in her response to the SOR that the 
balance on the debt was $64. She did not provide documentation of additional 
payments.4  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent debt of $397 to a utility company. Applicant 
provided documentation that she paid $50 to the creditor in February 2010. She stated 
in her response to the SOR that the balance on the debt was $272. She did not provide 
documentation of additional payments.5   
 
 Applicant provided documentation that she paid $50 toward the $254 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g in February 2010. She stated in her response to the SOR that the 
balance on the debt was $204.6   
 
 Applicant contracted with a debt management company in May 2010 to assist in 
resolving her larger debts. She stated that she would pay her smaller debts on her own. 
Applicant enrolled five debts, totaling about $15,000, in the company’s debt settlement 
program (DSP). The company charges a fee for their services of 15% of the “total debt 
and/or the difference saved upon settlement,” plus a monthly “processing fee” of $45. 
There is also a monthly service charge of $9.85. Applicant agreed to pay $450 in June 
2010 and $261 each month for an estimated 36 months thereafter into an account. After 
collecting their fees, the company would negotiate settlements with her creditors and 
pay the settlements out of the accrued funds. The specific debts are not listed on the 
contract with the debt management company. Applicant indicated the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f. and 1.h, which total about $12,759, were enrolled in the DSP. 
Applicant authorized the company to debit the funds from her bank account. She did not 
provide proof that the funds were actually paid into the DSP account.7 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling other than 
anything that may have been provided by the debt management company. She has 
about $37,000 in student loans. A February 2009 credit report listed the loans in 
deferment. Credit reports from January and September 2010 show that she pays $227 
per month toward the loans. Applicant stated that financial responsibility is now 
important to her. She stated that she “just had a child and [she is] more determined than 
ever to fix [her] credit because [she] would like to buy a house in the near future, to be a 
role model for her [child] and quite frankly being a single mother will be hard enough 
without having financial problems as well.”8  
 
 
                                                          
4 Id.  
 
5 Id.  
 
6 Id.  
 
7 Item 3; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
8 Items 3, 8-13; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from September 2008 through November 2008. Her 
unemployment qualifies as a condition that was outside her control. However, that 
 
6 
 
period of unemployment does not justify the amount of Applicant’s delinquent debts. To 
be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant began to address her financial issues after she realized that 
her finances could have an impact on her security clearance and ability to maintain 
employment. She paid or settled a few small debts that were not alleged in the SOR. 
She made payment arrangements with several of her creditors, and she provided proof 
that she made payments totaling $225 to four creditors in February 2010. She did not 
provide proof of any additional payments. She contracted with a debt management 
company in May 2010, but she did not submit proof that she made any of the payments 
into the company’s debt settlement program. Applicant’s financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable. I find that there is some mitigation under 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d). However, I 
have unanswered questions and concerns about Applicant’s finances and her suitability 
for a security clearance. The limited evidence in mitigation is insufficient for a 
determination that Applicant’s finances are in order. In sum, I conclude that financial 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. The limited information in the record 
has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a 
security clearance. Concerns remain about her judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
