1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08494
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to pay income taxes from money he inherited in 1986, leading to
a 1997 tax lien that he did not pay. Moreover, he failed to disclose it, as required, on a
2009 security clearance application.  Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On March 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the  adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the
Department of Defense on December 1, 2006.
Unlike most income that heirs receive through probate, money from IRAs is subject to taxation. It is unclear1
from the record who advised Applicant that he could have rolled the inherited IRA income into another IRA
to avoid taxation. Under the tax law when his mother passed, the government taxed inherited IRA income
regardless of whether the heir rolled it into another IRA. (See 26 U.S.C.A. § 408(d)(iii)(C) (1990))
2
Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2010, admitting the allegations. He
requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to me on July 6, 2010. On July 21,
2010, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for August 13, 2010. The
hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received five government exhibits, six Applicant
exhibits, and Applicant’s testimony. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 23,
2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old single man with two adult children. He has been
married twice. Both marriages ended in divorce. His children are from his first marriage.
(Tr. 14)
Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 1984. He served in the United States
Air Force from 1979 to 1984. (Tr. 16)
Since at least 1998, Applicant has worked in either the information technology or
engineering fields. (GE 1 at 16-21) Currently, he works for a DoD contractor as a
systems and design engineer. (Tr. 15) He is the lead field engineer. (AE D) 
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to the operational manager of
the program Applicant serves, he is “without a doubt, the hardest working individual on
[the] team, and there is no task too monumental for him to tackle.” (AE B) According to
Applicant’s supervisor, “he has a unique combination of systems engineering skills that
allow him to design and plan his work, and convey this plan very clearly to the
developers and customers.” (AE D)
In 1986, Applicant’s mother passed away. (Tr. 28) Applicant inherited $70,000.
(Tr. 28) This money stemmed from an individual retirement account (IRA) that his
mother owned. (Tr. 29) Unbeknownst to Applicant, after he received the account
through probate, he had to “roll it into another IRA” to avoid taxation and penalties.  (Tr.1
17, 29) He did not do this. Consequently, after a 1992 audit, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) concluded Applicant owed tax on the income in addition to a ten percent
penalty for terminating the IRA. (Tr. 29) The initial tax bill was $12,000. (Tr. 17) 
Applicant failed to pay the income tax deficiency, prompting the IRS in 1997 to
obtain a lien against his property. (Tr. 17) By then, the deficiency had accrued to
approximately $18,000. Applicant did not satisfy the lien. He contends he decided not to
pay the tax lien after consulting with an IRS agent who told him that the lien would
expire after ten years so long as the IRS made no efforts to collect it. (Tr. 18)
3
Currently, Applicant earns $125,000 annually. (Tr. 41) He has $20,000 in his
checking account. (Tr. 41)
In 1995, the state where Applicant was residing entered a tax lien against his
property in the approximate amount of $1,121. (GE 2 at 1) By 2006, the debt had
accrued to $2,767. (AE A) Applicant testified that he knew of this delinquency, but was
unaware the state had entered a tax lien against his property until his interview with a
security clearance investigator in 2010. (Tr. 19) By November 2006, Applicant had
satisfied this delinquency. (AE A)
Applicant completed a security clearance application in 2009. He failed to
disclose either the federal or the state tax lien as required by Section 26 of the
application. (Have you had a lien placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or
other debts?) In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant explained the omission, as follows:
Since I did not own physical or tangible property for a lien to be placed
against and my credit report did not show any judgments or liens, I
answered the question ‘No.’ I never deliberately tried to hide any facts . . . 
Applicant’s discharge status from the Air Force was general under honorable
conditions. (Tr. 16) Applicant testified that the fact his discharge was not honorable was
not conduct based. Instead, it was because he “requested to get out early.” (Tr. 16)
During cross-examination, Applicant admitted his discharge occurred as part of a non-
judicial punishment for failing a drug test. As part of the punishment, Applicant was also
demoted from sergeant to airman first class. (Tr. 22) 
     
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
4
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel . . .”. The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information (AG
¶ 18). 
SOR subparagraph 1.a reads, as follows:
You are indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for a tax lien entered
against you in August 1997 in the approximate amount of $18,060. As of
the date of this Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid.
Applicant did not satisfy the federal tax lien and contends he no longer is responsible to
pay the debt because the statute of limitations expired. For assessments of taxes made
after November 1990, the IRS cannot collect or levy any tax more than ten years after
the date of the assessment or levy. (U.S. Internal Revenue Code (IRC) § 6323(g)(3))
The IRS has one year after the expiration of the ten-year statute of limitations to refile a
tax lien. (IRC § 6323(g)(3)(A)) Here, the IRS entered the federal tax lien against
Applicant’s property in 1997. Therefore, it was only valid through 2007. The
Government produced no evidence that the IRS refiled the lien. I conclude the tax lien is
no longer outstanding.
The expiration of the federal tax lien, however, does not alter the negative
security ramifications of Applicant’s decision not to satisfy it while it was enforceable.
Consequently, AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
Applicant satisfied the state tax lien, listed in SOR subparagraph 1.b, in 2006. I
conclude he has mitigated this subparagraph. 
Upon considering the mitigating conditions, I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) partially
applies because Applicant satisfied the state tax lien. None of the other mitigating
conditions apply. Avoiding the responsibility to pay one’s debts, as Applicant did when
he chose to let the statute of limitations for collecting the federal income tax lien expire,
rather than pay it, is not demonstrative of fiscal responsibility. Instead, it compounds the
financial considerations security concern. 
5
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). 
Applicant’s failure to list his tax liens, as required on his 2009 security clearance
application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment,
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. The credibility of Applicant’s
explanation for omitting the tax liens is undermined by his untruthful testimony regarding
his discharge status from the Air Force. Under these circumstances, I conclude
Applicant falsified the security clearance application and none of the mitigating
conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant earns a good salary and has $20,000 in his checking account.
Typically, such facts serve to minimize financial consideration security concerns. In this
case, however, the security concerns are compounded because Applicant chose to
avoid his responsibility to pay his federal income tax debt by waiting for the statute of
limitations to expire, despite having the means to satisfy the delinquency. Applicant also
did not testify truthfully. Upon considering this case in the context of the whole-person
concept, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
