                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00148 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheila Lucas, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are the result of circumstances beyond his control. 
He understands the importance of maintaining financial responsibility and what it is 
expected of him to be eligible for a security clearance. He did not engage in 
questionable behavior in the acquisition of his debts. Given his circumstances, he has 
made reasonable efforts to resolve his financial problems, and given the opportunity, he 
will establish full financial responsibility. On balance, Applicant’s current financial 
problems do not cast doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 23, 2008. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
On June 4, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant an SOR, which specified the basis for 
its decision -- security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
On July 10, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 20, 
2010, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 26, 2010. The hearing was convened as scheduled on 
September 15, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant and two witnesses testified, and he presented 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open 
allowing Applicant an additional period to submit documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted AE 9, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all 15 factual allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated here as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, 
and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old physical security guard working for a government 
contractor. He requires a security clearance to continue his job. He attended college 
from 1989 until 1993, but is four classes short of a degree. He paid for his college 
education with student loans. He has been married for 11 years, and has three 
stepchildren and one grandchild. 
 
Applicant employment history shows that he was employed from May 2001 until 
September 2004; unemployed from September 2004 until July 2005; part-time 
employed (underemployed) from July 2005 until April 2006; employed from April 2006 
until February 2008; unemployed from February 2008 until July 2008; and employed by 
his current employer, a government contractor, from July 2008 until around July 2010. 
He received an interim security clearance shortly after he was hired. His interim security 
clearance was withdrawn as a result of the pending SOR, and he was suspended from 
his employment. He has been working on a limited part-time basis for his current 
employer pending the resolution of his security clearance. This is his first time applying 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
for a security clearance. There is no evidence that he has compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information, or that he has been involved in any 
security violations. 
 
In his July 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed he had 
financial problems. His background investigation revealed, and Applicant admitted, the 
15 delinquent or charged-off debts alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately $42,000. 
Applicant explained that he and his wife were providing financial support to two of his 
stepchildren and a grandchild. His then 15-year-old stepdaughter had a child out of 
wedlock eight years ago, and they have been living with Applicant and his wife until 
recently. Additionally, Applicant and his wife were providing financial support to another 
stepchild who is attending college. When he and his wife were both working, they were 
in a tight budget, but they were able to pay for their family’s day-to-day living expenses 
and to pay their debts. When Applicant was unemployed, they had trouble making ends 
meet with his wife’s income, his unemployment benefits, and his sporadic income from 
odd jobs. 
 
Applicant’s wife was employed full time from May 1994 until around April 2007, 
when she broke her foot and had to go into short-term disability, earning only 60% 
($19,200 a year) of her regular pay ($32,000 a year). From September 2007 until 
December 2009, her employer placed her on a part-time schedule because of the 
employer’s financial situation, and in December 2009, she was let go from her position 
because of a reduction in force. Applicant’s and his wife’s periods of unemployment 
made it almost financially impossible for them to pay their family’s day-to-day living 
expenses and their debts.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $1,886 judgment filed against Applicant for his failure to pay 
his homeowner association fees. Applicant acknowledged the debt, and testified he had 
not been able to pay the debt because of his precarious financial situation. In 
September 2010, he sent a letter to the creditor stating he was currently unemployed, 
but that he wanted to establish a payment plan to resolve the debt. (AE 4) SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($593), 1.e ($112), and 1.k ($527) were settled and paid by Applicant in September 
2010. (AE 9) 
 
Concerning the three alleged delinquent medical accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($191), 
1.d ($208), and 1.o ($155)), Applicant initially admitted them as his debts in his answer 
to the SOR. However, he later realized he could not identify the medical provider and 
could not determine whether these were his or his wife’s medical debts. In September 
2010, he sent written disputes to the three credit bureaus of the accounts and requested 
confirmation that these were his debts. At the same time, Applicant also disputed the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($2,008), 1.g ($500), 1.h ($1,805), 1.i ($555), 
and 1.j ($888), which he had admitted in his answer to the SOR. As of his hearing, he 
had not received a response concerning these accounts. 
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 1.l, Applicant testified that he and his wife purchased a home 
in 2002 for around $175,000. Because of their unemployment situation, they fell behind 
 
4 
 
 
on the mortgage payments and the account became delinquent for $12,606 (SOR ¶ 1.l). 
Applicant remained in contact with his mortgage creditor and informed the bank of his 
financial problems. In June 2010, Applicant established a new mortgage payment 
arrangement agreeing to pay $1,240 a month for four months, and then to make a lump 
sum payment to bring the account current. Applicant made the first two payments on his 
plan, and intended to comply with the third payment after the hearing. (AE 6) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a student loan in collection for around $14,000. Applicant 
acknowledged the debt, and testified he had not been able to pay it because of his 
financial situation. He presented documentary evidence showing that in the past, when 
he was financially able, he made some payments on his student loan. AE 9 shows $100 
payments made in January 2002, May 2003, and June 2003. Additionally, a 2005 
Department of Education statement shows he paid $715 towards accrued interest. And, 
in 2005, the U.S. Treasury Department offset $1,785 from his income tax refund and 
applied it to his student loan debt. In September 2010, Applicant sent a letter to the 
Department of Education requesting to establish a new payment schedule. (AE 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.n alleges a delinquent car loan for $1,046. In 2007, Applicant purchased 
a 2003 car for around $23,000. He became delinquent on his $16,000 note in 2009-
2010. Around June 2010, he sent a letter to the creditor explaining his financial situation 
and established a new payment plan. He made payments in July and August 2010 in 
compliance with his new loan rehabilitation payment plan. (AE 7) 
 
Applicant’s pastor and his wife testified on his behalf. The pastor considers him 
to be reliable, trustworthy, faithful, and a good family man. Applicant stated he is an 
asset to his employer and the agency he serves. Because of his dependability and 
performance during the last two years, his employer continues to call him to work on a 
part-time basis until his security clearance eligibility is adjudicated. 
 
Applicant was sincerely remorseful and contrite about his financial situation. At 
times, his demeanor indicated he is frustrated about his circumstances. He would like to 
pay his delinquent debts but finds himself in a “catch 22” situation. He has been the 
primary provider for his family and he is not earning sufficient money to pay for his 
family’s day-to-day living expenses and his delinquent debts. His take-home pay from 
his current job was around $1,800 to $2,000 a month. He and his wife are making 
changes in their lifestyle to save money to pay for their debts. Because his stepdaughter 
and grandchild recently moved to their own apartment, he believes he will now have 
some additional money at the end of the month to pay his debts. He has participated in 
financial counseling through his church and has identified other ways to save money.  
 
Applicant acknowledged he should have been more diligent in contacting his 
creditors and establishing payment plans. However, he correctly noted that, because he 
did not have any money left at the end of the month, it would not have been reasonable 
for him to attempt to establish payment plans he could not fulfill. Applicant has been 
most concerned about providing for the day-to-day expenses of his family and making 
sure that he keeps his house and car. In early 2009, Applicant started to pay his small 
 
5 
 
 
debts. He intends to contact the larger creditors to establish viable payment plans. His 
wife is also looking for a job. With both of them working, they will be able to better 
address their delinquent debts. Considering the totality of his circumstances, Applicant 
is doing all he can do to resolve his debts. Applicant’s credit reports do not show he has 
been making frivolous purchases or spending beyond his financial means.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
6 
 
 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 15 delinquent debts in collection or charged off, totaling 
approximately $42,000, which have been delinquent for several years. Applicant 
admitted, and the record evidence confirms that these are his delinquent accounts, but 
he disputed the validity of the total charges for some of the accounts. AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Between September 2004 and April 2006, Applicant was unemployed for 11 
months and underemployed in temporary or part-time jobs for 10 months. He was 
unemployed from February to July 2008, and he was suspended and placed on part-
time employment when his interim security clearance was suspended in July 2010. His 
wife broke her foot in April 2007, and was placed on short-term disability earning only 
60% of her regular pay. From September 2007 until December 2009, her employer 
placed her on a part-time schedule because of the employer’s financial situation, and in 
December 2009, she was let go from her position because of a reduction in force. 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance application. 
He paid three of the SOR debts in September 2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($593), 1.e ($112), and 
1.k ($527)). He made payment arrangements with the creditors of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l ($12,606) and 1.n ($1,046), and as of the day of his hearing, he had made 
two monthly payments towards the rehabilitation of both accounts. He also contacted 
the Department of Education seeking to establish a new payment plan. Applicant 
disputed in writing all remaining accounts. In sum, Applicant resolved three of the 15 
debts alleged in the SOR, and is making payments on two other debts. Outside of the 
15 delinquent debts discussed above, there is no evidence Applicant had other 
delinquent debts, or that he was living beyond his financial means.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because most 
of the SOR debts are unresolved (recent behavior). It partially applies because he 
resolved three of the delinquent debts, is making payments on two other debts, and 
appears to have a valid reason to dispute the three medical SOR debts. The evidence 
established circumstances beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his 
debts, i.e., his and his wife’s periods of unemployment and underemployment, and her 
injury. AG ¶ 20(b) is fully established by the evidence. Applicant presented sufficient 
evidence showing his efforts to contact creditors and pay his debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant participated in financial counseling through his 
church. He demonstrated he has the desire to resolve his debts by paying three debts, 
establishing payment plans for two other debts, and disputing the remaining debts. His 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
actions establish partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). He receives only partial credit 
because he should have been more diligent and aggressive in the resolution of his 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies because he is in the process of disputing the interest 
and charges on some of the SOR debts, and three medical debts may not be 
established.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant has a plan to resolve his 
financial problem, albeit dependent on his continued employment. His evidence shows 
that through the years, he maintained contact with the Department of Education and 
made payments towards his student loan. He also recently paid three debts and made 
payment arrangements for two other debts. He has a plan to resolve his other SOR 
debts.3 He intends to pay the smaller debts first and then address the larger debts.  
 
 Applicant understands the possible adverse security clearance consequences of 
not maintaining financial responsibility. I believe that given time, Applicant will resolve 
the remaining SOR debts and avoid similar financial problems in the future. Although 
Applicant should have been more diligent addressing his debts, and he still has several 
unresolved SOR debts, his past behavior and current financial situation do not raise 
doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Financial 
considerations concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
 
3 “[A]n applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given his 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009), citing ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
9 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant is a good husband and father. He has been taking care of his 
stepchildren and grandchild for the last 11 years. He has been successful in his job for a 
government contractor since 2008. He is a mature man and a good worker. He has 
sought counseling to overcome his financial problems and understands the importance 
of maintaining financial responsibility. There is no evidence he has ever compromised 
or caused others to compromise classified information. His financial problems do not 
seem to be the result of his living beyond his means or frivolous spending. His financial 
problems appear to be the result of his and his wife’s periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. He is doing all he can do under his circumstances to resolve his 
financial problems. He has been working hard at his current job, and he and his wife 
have made life-style changes to resolve their financial problems.  
 
I find Applicant’s testimony credible. He understands the importance of 
maintaining financial responsibility and what it is expected of him to be eligible for a 
security clearance. He disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance 
application. Applicant did not engage in questionable behavior in the acquisition of his 
debts. His delinquent debts were primarily the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. Considering his circumstances, he has made reasonable efforts to resolve his 
financial problems. He started to resolve his financial problems and given the 
opportunity, I believe he will continue to resolve his financial problems and establish full 
financial responsibility. Under the whole-person concept, this 38-year-old security 
guard’s current financial problems do not cast doubts on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment.  
 
The record evidence establishes Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.o:   For Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
