 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02454 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John N. Griffith, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 17, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called a witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through T 
that were admitted into evidence. Applicant’s exhibit list was marked as HE II. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor and works as a 
network security engineer. He has worked for his current employer since May 2008. He 
has a bachelor’s degree in computer networking technology. He is single and has no 
children. He has held a security clearance since 2004.1  
 
 The SOR alleges one delinquent debt for $73,751 that Applicant admits (SOR 
¶1.a). The debt was listed on credit reports obtained on December 2, 2008, September 
9, 2009, November 24, 2009, June 15, 2010, August 13, 2010 and April 8, 2010.  
 
 In January 2004, Applicant purchased a condominium (condo). He bought the 
condo for approximately $300,000. His parents assisted him with the purchase by 
providing a $50,000 down payment. He agreed to finance the condo with a three-and-a-
half year adjustable rate mortgage (ARM). Initially, his monthly payments were $1,300. 
Soon after acquiring the property, Applicant’s monthly payments increased significantly. 
At some point, the payments were double the amount he originally was paying. Even 
after depleting his personal savings and using his 401K savings plan funds, Applicant 
was having a difficult time making his mortgage payments. In approximately December 
2005, he secured a home equity loan of about $75,000. He used the proceeds for 
improvements to the condo and also to make his monthly mortgage payments. 
Applicant was still struggling to make the monthly condo payments so he took in a 
roommate to help with the payments. This effort did not help Applicant’s financial 
situation. He then sought to sell the condo through a short sale. When a sale failed to 
transpire and Applicant could no longer make the payments, the condo went into 
foreclosure in September 2008.2  
 
 In December 2009, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. His plan 
was approved and he currently makes monthly payments to the trustee of $360. Prior to 
July 2010, his payments were $190 per month. He made all of his payments. The debts 
included in the plan are the debt listed in the SOR and his student loan payments. 
Applicant was not delinquent on his student loan payments, but his bankruptcy attorney 
advised him to include those debts in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant’s most 
current credit report shows no other delinquent debts.3    
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-35, 38-41; GE 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 43; GE 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 36-37; AE H, J; GE 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified that Applicant is an honest and trustworthy 
employee who has shown good judgment. Additionally, Applicant produced numerous 
character references who all expounded on Applicant’s positive qualities and their belief 
that he deserves a security clearance. His employment performance reports indicated 
he is an excellent employee. Applicant also participated in financial counseling.4   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
4 AE B-G, P, Q, I, O. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant fell delinquent on a home equity loan and was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy his obligation. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant was put into his financial difficulty when he financed his condo using an 
ARM that accelerated his payment amount. Applicant’s experience with this type of loan 
and the disastrous consequences from it, make it unlikely that he will experience this 
type of financial transaction again. Additionally, this transaction does not cast doubt on 
his current, reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. This conclusion is supported 
by his character evidence. AG ¶ 20(a) is applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by an increase in monthly 
payments caused by his ARM. Applicant should have known that this event would 
happen since by definition an ARM increases over time. This would not be considered a 
condition that was outside his control. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. However, 
Applicant acted reasonable by using his savings and retirement income to make his 
mortgage payments, by taking a roommate to help make his payment, and by trying to 
short sell his condo prior to foreclosure. He also filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy to address 
the unresolved home equity loan and is making his scheduled payments under the plan.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling. His finances are being resolved and are 
under control. His monthly payments on his bankruptcy plan are sufficient to support a 
finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve his remaining 
debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant met his burden to establish sufficient mitigation evidence under AG ¶¶ 
20(a), (c), and (d) on the sole debt listed in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s excellent work record, his character references, and the 
support from his direct supervisor. I also found Applicant to be honest and candid about 
his finances. Applicant found himself with an unfavorable real estate mortgage that 
ultimately caused him financial distress, including a foreclosure and bankruptcy. 
However, he made the best of the situation and is paying off the SOR debt through his 
bankruptcy plan. Otherwise, he has no unresolved delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
