 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-08164 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: P. Todd Sartwell, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 11, 2009. On July 
26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline H. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 29, 2010; answered it on August 11, 2010; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
August 16, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 30, 2010, and 
the case was assigned to me on September 1, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on September 2, 2010, scheduling it for September 20, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but presented no witnesses or documentary evidence 
other than his answer to the SOR. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 30, 
2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the single allegation in the SOR, 
alleging marijuana use, with varying frequency, from September 2001 to “at least” April 
2009. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old fire protection engineer employed by a defense 
contractor. He graduated from college in May 2003, obtained a master’s degree in May 
2004, and worked for a private engineering firm until he began his current employment 
in June 2009. He married in September 2007. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant disclosed his marijuana use on his security clearance application. He 
stated that his marijuana use “was restricted to social smoking, on an infrequent basis,” 
about once every three to six months. (GX 1 at 43.) He was 20 years old when he first 
used marijuana (Tr. 26.) During college, he lived in a fraternity house where marijuana 
was used daily by the residents, but he used it only about once every two months at 
social events. He never purchased or sold marijuana. After completing his education, he 
used marijuana one or two times a year at parties with friends. After he was married in 
2007, he did not use marijuana again until April 2009, while he was at a bachelor party 
with nine college friends in a foreign country where he believes marijuana use is legal. 
At the bachelor party, he noticed that one of the nine friends in the group abstained from 
using marijuana because he held a security clearance. (Answer to SOR at 1; Tr. 20.) He 
has not used it since April 2009. (Tr. 15-19.) 
 
 Applicant moved to a different part of the country to accept his current job, and 
he no longer associates with his marijuana-using friends. He was advised of his 
employer’s policy to maintain a drug-free workplace, and he understands that drug use 
will not be tolerated. (Tr. 37.) When he responded to the SOR, he declared his intention 
to not abuse any drugs in the future and agreed to automatic revocation of his clearance 
for any violation. (Answer to SOR at 2.) He has never been arrested for or charged with 
a drug-related offense, and he has never been treated for drug addiction or abuse.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
3 
 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
- 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ This 
guideline encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 24(a)(1).  
 
The evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
25(a) (“ any drug abuse”, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction”); and AG ¶ 25(c): 
(“illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia”). Thus, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant has used marijuana only once since he was married in September 
2007, more than three years ago. He last used marijuana in April 2009, about 17 
months before his hearing. He is not addicted to drugs and considers them part of his 
immature past. Since his last use of marijuana, he has moved to a new job at a new 
location, and he made new friends and associates. I conclude AG ¶ 26(a) is 
established.  
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
 
5 
 
 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant has satisfied all four 
prongs of this mitigating condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Like many young adults, Applicant used marijuana in a college environment and 
now realizes that it is inconsistent with holding a position of trust. He was candid, 
sincere, and very credible at the hearing. He realizes that his statement of intent places 
him on probation, with no second chances. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline H, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the 
whole person, and mindful of my obligation to decide close cases in favor of national 
security, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on his drug 
involvement. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
