 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05254 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 23, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 18, 2010.1 The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through O at the hearing. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted AE P through FF that were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum was marked HE II. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 24, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for over 29 years. He performs business management functions for 
his company. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married and he has three children. He 
has held a security clearance since 2005.2  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts and a prior bankruptcy discharge in 1997. 
The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on April 16, 2009, July 24, 2009, 
January 21, 2010, June 17, 2010, and August 13, 2010. In his answer, Applicant denied 
owing the debts alleged in SOR, but he admitted all the debts in his testimony at his 
hearing. He also admitted the prior bankruptcy discharge.3  
 
 Applicant attributes his 1997 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.g) to his wife’s job loss. She 
suffers from Lupus and that condition affected her employment. Additionally, their health 
insurance does not cover all the costs associated with her Lupus. She eventually 
received disability income for her condition in the amount of $1,200 per month. The 
bankruptcy action discharged approximately $42,000 worth of unsecured debts.4  
 
 Applicant’s more recent financial delinquencies are attributable to a home 
purchase in 2003 and subsequent refinancing action. He bought the house in 2003 for 
approximately $280,000. His original monthly payments were about $2,500. In 2006, he 
took out a home equity loan (HEL) to pay for improvements. He struggled to make the 
monthly payments from 2003 through 2008. In 2009, he sought a loan modification of 
his original mortgage. He sought this modification to help pay for his children’s college 
tuition. As a result of these actions, his monthly mortgage payments began to rise. 
Eventually, the total monthly payment was $4,500. After the loan modification was 
approved his monthly payments were reduced to $2,800. He was able to pay the 
modified monthly payments though June of 2010. He can no longer afford these 
                                                          
1 An Amended Notice of Hearing was issued on July 27, 2010, changing the time of the hearing to 
9:00 am from the original time of 1:30 pm. The hearing was held on August 18, 2010 as originally 
scheduled. 
 
2 Tr. at 9, 46-49; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 48, 71-79. 
 
4 Tr. at 53-54; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
payments and is seeking to short sell his home. He owes approximately $575,000 on 
the mortgage and he is currently two payments behind.5    
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are medical debts. Applicant paid both 
debts in April 2010.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges the delinquent HEL in the amount of $65,332. This debt 
remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place. The last payment made on this 
debt was in May 2009.7   
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.f are credit card or consumer debts in 
the respective amounts of: $2,385, $14,414, and $5,710. Applicant admitted these 
debts and set up a payment plan to satisfy the debts. He provided evidence of one 
payment made on each debt.8 
 
 Applicant included in his post hearing submission a letter from an attorney stating 
that Applicant had retained that office regarding a bankruptcy petition. No further 
information was given.9   
 
 Applicant’s performance management reports from his employer show he is an 
outstanding employee. Additionally, numerous character letters attest to Applicant’s 
trustworthiness and honesty. He was also nominated by his supervisor for the employee 
of the quarter in October 2007.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 56-67; GE 9-10. 
 
6 Tr. at 70-71; AE C. 
 
7 Tr. at 79-83; GE 9-10. 
 
8 Tr. at 72-78; GE 9-10; AE D-F, EE-FF. 
 
9 AE P-Q. 
 
10 AE G-O, R-Y, BB-DD. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts including medical debts, 
credit card debts, and a home equity loan and was unable or unwilling to satisfy his 
obligations. Additionally, Applicant went though bankruptcy in 1997. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant still owes the consumer debts and the HEL listed in the SOR with no 
payment plan in place for the HEL. His financial issues are recent and ongoing and his 
current reliability is questionable given his failure to pay the remaining debts and his 
intent to file a second bankruptcy action. However, Applicant’s 1997 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy is remote and those debts were resolved by Applicant. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
partially applicable to SOR ¶ 1.g.  
 
Applicant chose to buy a home and later to acquire more debt than equity in the 
home. As a result, he was unable to meet his other financial obligations. These do not 
qualify as conditions that were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling through a debt management service. 
Although two debts were paid, and he has made one monthly payment on the three 
consumer debts, he has done nothing to address the HEL. Therefore, his finances are 
not being resolved and are not under control. His limited payments toward the debt 
 
6 
 
payment plan are insufficient to support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to 
pay or otherwise resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are only applicable 
to the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 29 years of service to his employer and outstanding 
work evaluations. I also considered the character letters of support for him. I also found 
Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe he is sincere about 
getting his finances in order. However, he repeatedly burdened himself by assuming 
additional mortgage obligations. He has done very little to resolve any of his debts. His 
payment plan on the consumer debts only show that he made one monthly payment. He 
is now seeking a possible second bankruptcy action to extricate himself from his debt 
situation. This reflects poor judgment. His past financial track record, that includes a 
prior bankruptcy action, reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to 
question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
