 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07283 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 18, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 16, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through T, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted documents, which were 
marked AE U through DD and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s post-
hearing memorandum was marked HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He has a 
high school diploma. He is married and has one child. This is his second marriage, his 
first one ended in divorce. He served in the Navy for eight years and was discharged 
with an honorable discharge in the pay grade of E-4.1  
 
 The SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts. The debts were listed on credit reports 
obtained on February 12, 2010, February 18, 2010, June 16, 2010, July 16, 2010, and 
August 13, 2010. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.g, and 
1.i – 1.k. In his answer, he disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.l; however, 
he admitted those debts in his testimony at hearing.2   
 
 Applicant was in the Navy during his first marriage. He and his wife accumulated 
debt during their marriage, including a car that is the subject of the debt listed at SOR ¶ 
1.e. In September 2005, Applicant and his wife divorced. As part of the property 
settlement, Applicant assumed all the marital debt, including the car payments. In 
September 2006, Applicant was discharged from the Navy. His pay dropped 
considerably at that time making it difficult to keep up with his debts. As a consequence, 
he was unable to make his car payments and the car was repossessed. Even though 
this car debt resulted in repossession, Applicant made car payments from 2001 until 
2006. The car was sold at auction for $1,400 leaving Applicant with the deficiency 
balance of over $19,000.3  
 
 Applicant remarried in May 2006. His son was born in 2007 and he has struggled 
with medical issues since his birth, which have created a financial burden on Applicant.4  
 
 Through the assistance of his in-laws, Applicant recently paid all the debts listed 
in the SOR except for ¶1.e, the repossessed car debt. The supporting documentation 
showing payment of the debts is noted in the footnote.5    
                                                          
1 Tr. at 10, 47, 49-50, 83; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to SOR; Tr. at 64, 67-68. 
 
3 Tr. at 52-53, 68, 70-74. 
 
4 GE 1; Tr. at 40-41. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law testified that he intends to assist Applicant with the 
remaining unpaid debt. He also stated that he and his wife have given Applicant and his 
wife financial counseling. They meet on a regular basis and go over Applicant’s 
finances. Applicant’s father-in-law does not see frivolous spending by Applicant and 
believes he is on the right path for financial recovery. Applicant has a written monthly 
budget. Additionally, Applicant’s wife just finished technical school and will soon start 
working, which will bring in additional income for the family.6 
 
 Applicant is also supported by character letters written by coworkers, friends, and 
relatives. He is described as a dependable and capable employee who is reliable and 
possesses good ethics. He is also described as a “man of integrity” and a “team 
player”.7   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
5 AE C shows payment of SOR ¶ 1.a; AE W shows payment of SOR ¶ 1.b; Applicant’s answer 
shows payment of SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d; AE G shows payment of SOR ¶ 1.f; Applicant’s answer shows 
payment of SOR ¶ 1.g; AE U shows payment of SOR ¶ 1.h; Applicant’s answer shows payment of SOR 
¶¶ 1.i – 1.k; and AE X shows payment of SOR ¶ 1.l. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-43, 80-81; AE CC. 
 
7 AE Y, Z, AA. 
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the Applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
Applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although Applicant’s debts were old, they remained unpaid until recently. 
Because of the counseling and financial discipline instilled by his in-laws, it is unlikely 
that these type of debts will go unpaid in the future. Additionally, they are not the type of 
debts that cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies.  
 
Applicant’s diminution of pay when he left the Navy and the expenses related to 
his son’s medical needs contributed to his financial problems. These qualify as 
conditions that were outside of his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant acted 
responsibly when he sought and received counseling and assistance from his in-laws. 
With their help, Applicant was able to pay all but one debt and they have agreed to help 
him pay the unresolved debt. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 In addition to the counseling described above, Applicant paid all the SOR debts 
except for the car repossession (SOR ¶ 1.e). However, he committed to pay that debt 
and his father-in-law committed to assist him in paying that debt. He has a budget and 
is meeting all his current expenses. Applicant has made a good-faith effort to pay or 
otherwise resolve his debts.8 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable.  
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
In 2005, Applicant found himself responsible for all the debts of his first marriage 
and struggled to make ends meet after leaving the Navy in 2006. He remarried and had 
a child with significant medical issues, which created more financial problems. The 
debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. With the help of his in-laws, Applicant 
has overcome his debt history. I also considered Applicant’s favorable character 
evidence. I had the opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant and observe his 
manner and deportment. I believe he will honor his commitment to pay the remaining 
debt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
