                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05049 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 13, 2009, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On February 4, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 11, 2010. He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 1, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 31, 2010. The case was 
assigned originally to another administrative judge on April 6, 2010.  I received the case 
assignment on April 19, 2010, on a case reassignment based on workload 
considerations. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 29, 2010, and I convened the 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
hearing as scheduled on May 28, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 8, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A 
through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 
8, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 10, 2010, to 
submit additional matters.  On June 10, 2010, he submitted Exhibits F to H, without 
objection. The record closed on June 10, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the factual allegations 
contained in the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegation in ¶ 1.b of the 
SOR. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a 
security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 31 year old, unmarried, and works for a defense contractor as a field 
service representative. He has worked for that employer for the past two years. Prior to 
this employment, Applicant was an independent contractor installing cable lines for 
various companies. (Tr. 23-26; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant owes six delinquent debts totaling $15,300 as listed in the SOR. His 
financial difficulties arose from his failure to pay state and federal income taxes for the 
years 2003 to 2008. As an independent contractor he was required to deduct his own 
withholding and sending the taxes to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and state tax 
authorities where he worked. His other debts resulted from his lack of attention to, or 
money for, paying those debts. (Tr. 28-44, 67, 72; Exhibits 2-8) 
 
 The first debt Applicant owes is $11,526 to the IRS for a federal tax lien 
(Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant’s total income tax debt is $24,000 owed for the years 
2003, 2004, 2006, and 2007. Applicant was an independent contractor during those 
years and failed to set aside any withholding funds with which to pay his income taxes. 
Simultaneously in those years he failed to file income tax returns with the federal 
government. As time went by he then became afraid to try to correct his situation. He 
hired a commercial firm to rectify his past due taxes and prepare the 2008 income tax 
return. He hired another commercial income tax preparer firm to prepare his 2009 
federal income tax return. He also is preparing the state tax returns for those years. He 
paid those state taxes in 2010. He now has an installment payment agreement with the 
IRS to pay $400 monthly for 60 months to pay the 2003, 2004, 2006, and 2007 tax 
years. His total payments will be $24,000, the amount he owes the IRS. He started 
making those payments in April 2010. These debts are being resolved by payment or 
installment agreements. (Tr. 19-44, 67, 72; Exhibits 2-8, D, E, G, H) 
 
 Applicant owes $1,650 on a credit card (Subparagraph 1.b). He paid this debt in 
April 2010. He claims he made payments in 2008. He finished making payments in 
2010. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 46-49; Exhibits 2-8, B, C) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes $659 on a credit card debt (Subparagraph 1.c). He paid this debt 
on April 15, 2010. The debt is resolved. (Tr. 49-51; Exhibits 2-8, B) 
 
 Applicant owes $405 on a medical debt since December 2005 (Subparagraph 
1.d). Applicant paid this debt on June 3, 2010. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 52; Exhibits 2-
8, F) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $467 on checking account overdrafts. Applicant was 
using the float on his deposits to write checks. That banking practice was stopped by 
Applicant’s bank some years ago, but he continued to owe this debt (Subparagraph 
1.e). Applicant paid this debt on April 7, 2010. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 54-56; Exhibits 
2-8, A) 
 
 Applicant’s final delinquent debt listed in the SOR is $593 owed on an early 
termination fee for a cell phone account (Subparagraph 1.f). This debt is unpaid. 
Applicant wanted to arrange to pay his taxes first before resolving this debt. His 
intention is to pay a lump sum to repay this debt. It is unresolved. (Tr. 57, 58; Exhibits 2-
8) 
 
 Applicant lives with his grandmother when he is in his work area. He helps her 
with her household expenses. His truck is fully paid. On the weekends he lives with his 
mother in another state. He has $2,000 in one credit union checking account and $400 
in another checking account. Applicant is saving his money to build a cash reserve for 
the future and any unanticipated expenses that might arise. His net remaining income 
monthly is now $1,600. Applicant does not have any credit cards. He has two bank debit 
cards he uses for monthly expenses. (Tr. 59-65, 70; Exhibit 3) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Three conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant accumulated $15,300 in delinquent debt from 2003 to the present time 
that remained unpaid.  Applicant has 6 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He failed to 
file state and federal income tax forms for seven years. These three disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s failure to pay his state and federal income taxes and several other 
debts occurred recently. His actions constitute a pattern of behavior regarding his 
finances. There were no unusual circumstances that prevented him from paying his 
taxes and his debts. He did not exercise good judgment in failing to file his income tax 
returns. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were not beyond his control. He did not act 
responsibly in failing to pay his debts and his income taxes. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not 
apply.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is currently paying his debts in an orderly manner. He ceased 
procrastinating about them and focused on making regular payments. Therefore, there 
are clear indications from the evidence he presented that the financial problems are 
under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) applies.  
 
Applicant was able to focus his efforts to pay all but one phone debt by the time 
of the hearing. Based on his current progress in repaying his delinquent debts, it is likely 
Applicant will have the last debt paid soon. He intends to pay it. He paid five debts, 
including getting his Federal and state tax returns filed. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of 
Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant did not present any reasonable basis to dispute the debts. He did not 
provide any documents to assert any basis for a debt dispute. AG ¶ 20 (e) does not 
apply. 
 
There is no evidence or discussion at the hearing about any affluence being an 
issue. AG ¶ 20 (f) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was a working adult who 
failed for seven years to file and pay his federal and state income taxes. He also 
allowed debts for goods and services he purchased to be unpaid. He showed at the 
hearing he has taken responsible actions to resolve his debts. He hired a tax service to 
file his past due tax returns. He entered a $400 per month installment payment 
agreement with the IRS. He made lump sum payments to the state tax authorities. He 
 
7 
 
 
also resolved all but one commercial debt. He will resolve that debt now that he has his 
income tax problems being resolved. Applicant prefers to make lump sum payments on 
his debts, as shown by his hearing testimony and his past actions. He is credible on his 
declared intention to pay this debt.  
 
Reviewing all the facts in the case there is no potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress because Applicant resolved five of the six debts listed in the 
SOR. He has a plan to pay the sixth debt. He has the savings and income to pay that 
debt quickly. He changed his attitude and practices on his taxes. He took responsibility 
for the filing and payment of all taxes.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.f:   For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
