 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-06869
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: John N. Griffith, Esq.
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant allowed two loans on a rental property he owns to become delinquent. He
sought and followed the advice of a real estate attorney and a bankruptcy attorney in
resolving his delinquent debt. Clearance is granted.
On May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on June 28, 2010. He
denied both SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant’s attorney was notified of the hearing date by Department Counsel on or about August 16,2
2010, and he agreed to waive any technical defect in the event the formal notice was not actually received by
his office more than 15 days prior to the hearing. (Tr. 12) 
2
The case was assigned to me on August 6, 2010. A notice of hearing was issued
on September 13, 2010, scheduling the hearing for September 28, 2010.  The hearing was2
conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted seven documentary exhibits that
were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-7 and admitted into the record without
objection. Applicant testified, called four witnesses to testify on his behalf, and submitted
11 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A-K, and admitted
into the record without objection. The record was held open to provide Applicant the
opportunity to submit additional documentation in support of his case. Five documents
were timely received, marked as AE L-P, and admitted into the record without objection.
Department Counsel’s e-mail indicating she did not object to AE L-P was marked as
Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and is included in the file. The transcript was received on
October 7, 2010.     
Findings of Fact
After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 35-year-old man who has worked as a software engineer for a
defense contractor since April 2007. He was employed by a different defense contractor
in the same capacity from October 1998 until March 2007. He graduated from college in
December 1997, and was awarded a bachelor degree in electrical engineering. Applicant’s
gross income was $95,209 in 2009, and $98,382 in 2008. As of October 29, 2010,
Applicant’s gross income for 2010 was $72,542.97. (AE L, pg. 40) 
Applicant has been married since September 2001. He has three children, ages six,
four, and one. Applicant’s wife works part-time. Her gross income was $14,626 in 2009,
and $22,714 in 2008. As of October 29, 2010, her gross income for 2010 was $14,743.40.
(AE L, pg. 40) 
The SOR alleges two delinquent debts secured by mortgages owing in the
combined total amount of $62,122. Both of these debts arise from investment property that
proved to be unprofitable and which Applicant has been trying to dispose of in the most
cost-effective manner for the past four years. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection
on October 29, 2010, and will be rid of these debts in the near future. He received credit
counseling in September 2010, as a prerequisite to filing for bankruptcy protection.
Applicant’s financial problems originated from a business adventure he and his
former college roommate entered into in 2002. After investigating investment opportunities
and educationally preparing themselves to enter into the real estate investment market,
they formed a corporation for that purpose. However, because the corporation was newly
formed and lacked a credit history, they had to purchase properties in their individual
3
names. As of the date of the hearing, they each owned three properties that were secured
by mortgages in their individual or joint names. 
The corporation was intended to concentrate on low-cost single family dwellings. It
realized a profit of a few thousand dollars from the purchase and sale of two dwellings, but
suffered a major setback when it ventured into the purchase of a four-unit apartment
building. Almost $10,000 damage was discovered to have been caused by one tenant
when he vacated one of the units. Other tenants lasted only short periods of time leaving
units unrented. The cost of mortgage payments, utilities, taxes, etc., greatly exceeded the
income from the property necessitating a business decision to get rid of the property in the
most cost-effective way possible. 
Applicant unsuccessfully attempted a conventional sale of the apartment building
beginning in 2006. However, the market value of the property had decreased from when
he had purchased it. Applicant next attempted a short-sale of the building. When that also
failed, he consulted an attorney on how to rid himself of the property. The attorney advised
him to stop making payments on the mortgages owing on the building because it was
unclear from the title record what company actually held the mortgages. One of the
companies who purportedly owned the debt filed suit against Applicant in an attempt to
collect the debt, but dismissed the suit because it could not affirmatively establish it was
the owner of the debt. Through the various attempts to sell or otherwise settle the debts,
the primary mortgage holder commenced foreclosure proceedings which were pending as
of the date of the hearing. 
Applicant’s business venture took another downturn in April 2010, when a tenant in
a two-unit apartment building he owns was charged with possessing controlled substances
in the apartment. As a result, the city where the building is located condemned the building
for one year which necessitated the second tenant vacating the premises and prohibits
Applicant from renting either unit to anyone until May 2011.
Applicant and his partner have decided they need to dissolve the corporation and
terminate their business relationship. Each is to retain the properties held in their individual
names and Applicant is to assume responsibility for the property that is jointly held. They
have further agreed to liquidate those properties and will settle between themselves any
delinquencies they incur.
Applicant’s credit reports indicate he is current on all debts other than those
associated with the rental property. His Chapter 13 bankruptcy pleadings disclose that all
rental units are to be surrendered. His remaining debts included in the bankruptcy are
proposed to be settled by monthly payments of $963 for 60 months.   
Applicant is a deacon in his church and his responsibilities include overseeing the
care of church property, overseeing the allocation of resources for those in need and
distress in the congregation and community, and developing the church budget. He has
personally participated in mission work in foreign countries. The senior pastor of his church
and others who know him from his involvement in the church vouch for his integrity,
trustworthiness, and honesty.
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
4
An individual who has known Applicant as a friend and as a person he supervised
in his current employment considers Applicant to be responsible, trustworthy, and honest.
A member of Applicant’s bible study group provided similar opinions concerning Applicant’s
character.
     
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F
(financial considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant
in this case. 
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of6
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant7
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id. at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
5
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant incurred financial delinquencies in connection with two loans secured by
mortgages on a rental property he owned. He failed in efforts to sell the property and
followed the advice of an attorney who recommended that he stop making payments on
the mortgage. The result was that foreclosure proceedings were commenced by one of
Applicant’s creditors. Disqualifying Condition (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts applies.
Applicant’s credit reports indicate that he has lived a financially responsible lifestyle
and remained current on his debts, with the sole exception of the rental property in issue.
He and his college roommate undertook a business venture in 2002. Applicant and his
roommate educated themselves about the investment real estate business before they
went into business together and initially made a small profit from the business. However,
the destruction of one of the units in the four-unit rental property, the continuing turnover
of tenants, the one-year loss of income from a second property, and the declining real
estate market, caused them to start losing money in about 2006. 
Applicant reasonably attempted to sell the four-unit property through a conventional
sale and then through a short-sale. When those efforts failed, he consulted an attorney and
followed his advice to stop making payments because of questions about the validity of the
creditors’ claims to hold the mortgages. He has now begun to liquidate the business
venture with his friend and he has initiated Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceedings, including
participation in counseling, to fully resolve the financial problems that arose from the failed
investment real estate business. 
The following Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply: MC 20(a): the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., . . . a business downturn, . . .), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances; MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving
6
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
Department Counsel cited ISCR Case No. 09-00395 (June 8, 2010) in her argument
that it is not consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
That case is distinguishable in a number of respects, including that Applicant herein did not
purchase property that he should have been able to foresee would become unprofitable
or beyond his ability to afford. On the contrary, Applicant prepared himself for the business
venture he undertook, reasonably purchased low-cost properties that, at the time of
purchase, could be expected to turn a profit, and acted responsibly in attempting to
extricate himself from the financial problems he encountered from the failing business.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept,
including Applicant’s church and community activities, his steady employment history, the
recommendations of his supervisor, friends, and pastor, and the applicable disqualifying
and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security
concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his ultimate burden of
persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

