1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-07217
SSN: --------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
December 13, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline C for
Applicant (Item 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding
Classified” Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on June 24, 2010, (Item 3),
and he included additional documents. He also requested that his case be decided on
the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On August 5, 2010, Department Counsel prepared the Department's written
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
2
 
Applicant, and he was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 19, 2010.
Applicant did not submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on October 28, 2010.
In the FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits (Items 1-5).
No additional documents were offered by Applicant. Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR (Item 3) Applicant admitted the SOR allegation under Guideline C.
The admitted allegation is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including the
FORM, Applicant's RSOR, and the other admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 20 years old. He works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference) 
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant exercises dual citizenship with Canada
and the United States by possessing a Canadian passport issued on May 9, 2008, with
an expiration date of May 9, 2013, even though he is a United States citizen by birth. 
In Applicant’s Security Clearance Application (SCA), he stated that he was a dual
citizen of the United States and Canada. He indicated that his father is a dual citizen of
the United States and Canada, and his non-U.S. citizenship is due to the citizenship of
at least one of his parents. He also averred that he has never renounced or attempted
to renounce his foreign citizenship. (Item 4.) 
In his Response to Interrogatories, Applicant stated that he was an intern at his
place of employment, and he was requesting that his Facility Security Officer provide
documentation showing that he did not need to have a security clearance. He stated,
“The reason is that if I wish to proceed with my security clearance, I will be required to
destroy my Canadian passport, which I do not wish to do at this time.” He also
explained that he currently had a Canadian passport because “my parents thought I
should get it.” (Item 5.) Applicant gave no information as to why his parents wanted him
to have a Canadian passport, or why he continued to retain his Canadian citizenship
and did not want to revoke his Canadian passport. 
3
 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
4
 
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
        Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving Foreign Preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
      Applicant’s application, receipt, and continuing use of a passport from a
country other than the United States, raises Foreign Preference concerns under
Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10 (a) “the exercise of the privilege of foreign citizenship.. .
possession of a current foreign passport.”
      Applicant continues to maintain his Canadian passport, for which he applied
as a United States citizen, and he has indicted  he is not willing to surrender or destroy
his Canadian passport. Also, Applicant has given no indication that he is willing to
renounce his Canadian citizenship. Therefore, I do not find that any Mitigating Condition
(MC) under this guideline applies to this case. After considering all of the evidence of
record on Guideline C, I conclude that disqualifying evidence is present, and there is no
mitigating evidence. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case under the whole-person concept.
This decision must be based completely on the written record, as I did not have the
opportunity to observe Applicant testify in this Administrative Determination. Since no
evidence was submitted about Applicant’s background, including no letters of reference,
5
 
evaluations, scholastic records or any other information, there was no evidence to
mitigate Applicant’s case under the whole-person concept. Therefore, I find that the
record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
 
