1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08097
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems were caused primarily by a failed business, a
subsequent divorce, and a six month period of unemployment. Over the past year and a
half, she has either satisfied, resolved, or implemented payment plans for her previously
delinquent debts.  Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an undated
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on December
1, 2006.
2
Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2010, admitting all of the allegations.
She requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to me on July 13, 2010. On July
21, 2010, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for August 13, 2010. The
hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received seven government exhibits, five
Applicant exhibits, and Applicant’s testimony. I left the record open at the conclusion of
the hearing, at Applicant’s request, to allow her to submit additional exhibits. Within the
time allotted, she submitted four additional exhibits that I marked and received as
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) F through I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 23,
2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old single woman with two children, ages 15 and 12. In
2004, she and her husband divorced after ten years of marriage. Currently, Applicant
has physical custody of the children.
Applicant has a high school education and has taken some college courses. (Tr.
15) She works for a defense contractor as a security guard. Her duties include
defending the security of the building’s perimeter and monitoring surveillance cameras.
(Tr. 16) According to her supervisor, Applicant “carries out her assigned duties with
professionalism, integrity, and enthusiasm.” (AE A)
In 1991, Applicant and her boyfriend (whom she would later marry) started a
personal training business and leased a gym. (Tr. 21) They subleased the downstairs
portion of the building to a chiropractor. Subsequently, the chiropractor’s business
began struggling and he stopped making rental payments to Applicant and her
husband, rendering them unable to meet their rental payments. (Tr. 25)
In May 1998, Applicant and her husband filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Answer)
They listed approximately $50,000 of debt. Approximately 70 percent of this debt was
business-related. (GE 5 at 6) Later that year,  the bankruptcy court granted the
bankruptcy petition and discharged the debt. (GE 5 at 5) 
After the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and her husband continued to operate
the business in a different location. (Tr. 25) In 2002, they sold the business and their
home, and relocated to another state. (Tr. 27) Shortly after purchasing a new home,
Applicant and her husband increasingly disagreed about their future plans. Specifically,
Applicant’s husband wanted to start another personal training business, whereas, she
wanted to focus on becoming a police officer.
In the summer of 2003, Applicant successfully completed training to become a
police officer and joined the local police force where she worked for the next four years.
At or about the time she completed police officer training, she separated from her
husband and filed for divorce. (Tr. 29) The divorce became final in March 2004. 
3
Applicant maintained an amicable relationship with her ex-husband, sharing legal
custody of the children. (Tr. 36) During the first few years after the divorce, Applicant’s
husband maintained physical custody of the children, and Applicant voluntarily provided
child support payments. 
In April 2004, Applicant purchased a home for $184,000. (Tr. 29-32, 44) In 2006,
she took out a second mortgage on the home for approximately $33,000. (Tr. 45) She
used this money for home improvements and to help her elderly mother. (Tr. 45) 
Applicant found it increasingly difficult to make her mortgage payments and pay
her bills. Consequently, she became overly reliant on credit cards. (Tr. 41) By late 2006,
she had stopped making credit card payments and focused exclusively on the mortgage
in an effort “to keep the roof over [her] head.” (Tr. 42) As of the SOR date, three of
Applicant’s credit cards, totaling approximately $18,000 as listed in SOR subparagraphs
1.a through 1.c, remained delinquent. (Answer)
In May 2008, Applicant’s ex-husband lost his job, prompting Applicant to increase
the financial support that she had been providing to him and their children. (Tr. 36) Later
that year, Applicant’s husband, along with her children, relocated to the state where he
and Applicant had lived when they first got married. (Tr. 31, 38) 
In July 2008, Applicant then decided to relocate also, so that she could remain in
contact with her children. Consequently, she resigned from the police department, and
relocated, moving in with her mother. (Tr. 31-33)
After relocating, Applicant had difficulty finding a new job. Before her current
employer hired her in June 2009, she had been unemployed for six months. (Tr. 33) 
Applicant listed her home on the real estate market before she relocated. (GE 6
at 10) Because of the real estate market crash in 2008, her home had depreciated by
nearly $90,000. Consequently, she owed more than the home was worth and was
unable to sell it. She attempted to rent it, but was unsuccessful. (Tr. 48) In April 2009,
the bank initiated foreclosure proceedings.  (GE 6 at 21) As of the SOR date, the
mortgage balance was $184,000 and Appellant was past due on payments in the
approximate amount of $17,972, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. During this
period, Applicant’s second mortgage also became delinquent, as alleged in SOR
subparagraph 1.d. (Tr. 45)
In November 2009, Applicant began satisfying her delinquencies, beginning with
an unlisted creditor to whom she owed $2,700. (GE 6 at 15) Since then, she has been
paying the creditor $100 per month consistent with a payment plan that she arranged.
(Id.)
In June 2010, Applicant entered into a settlement agreement with the collection
agent for the creditor listed in SOR subparagraph 1.b. (Answer at Attachment 2) By
4
September 2010, she had satisfied this account through biweekly payments ranging
between $300 and $700. (Id.; AE H at 2) 
In June 2010, Applicant also entered into a settlement agreement with the
creditor listed in SOR subparagraph 1.c. The amount she paid each month through the
settlement agreement is unclear from the record. Nevertheless, she had satisfied the
delinquency by September 2010. (GE F) 
Now that Applicant has satisfied the two credit card debts listed in SOR
subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c, she is focusing upon the largest credit card delinquency,
SOR subparagraph 1.a, which is delinquent in the amount of $9,856. On September 7,
2010, she made a $50 payment. (GE G at 2) She intends to pay “$50 or more” monthly
until she satisfies the account. (Id. at 1)
In June 2010, Applicant accepted an offer from a buyer to purchase her home.
Because the offer was for an amount less than what Appellant owed on the mortgage,
she  began negotiating a short sale of the home through the  bank. (AE E) The bank
finalized the short-sale in August 2010. (AE I) Both the first and second mortgages on
the home, as listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e, were satisfied through the short
sale process. (Answer, Attachment E) 
Currently, Applicant earns $75,000 annually. She has between three to five
hundred dollars of after-expense income remaining each month. (Tr. 57) She keeps up
with her incoming monthly expenses and has accrued no further delinquencies. (Tr. 57) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
5
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information (AG
¶ 18). Over the past 20 years, Applicant has experienced two major episodes of
financial difficulty. The first episode began in the early to mid-1990s and the second
began in 2006. AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
Applicant’s first episode of financial difficulty related primarily to the struggles she
and her husband experienced with operating a business, which were exacerbated when
their tenant defaulted on rental payments. The second episode stemmed from the
financial disruption caused by Applicant’s divorce, her inability to sell her home after
moving in 2008, and a six month period of unemployment in early 2009. 
Since Applicant began working at her current job, she has satisfied two of her
credit card delinquencies entirely (SOR subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c), and has begun
paying the third (SOR subparagraph 1.a) through monthly payments. She satisfied both
mortgages through the short sale process. 
 Applicant has ample disposable income to satisfy her remaining debt, and she is
keeping current with all of her recurring monthly expenses. AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 20(d)
apply. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concern.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant experienced financial problems in the 1990s that compelled her to
pursue the Chapter 7 bankruptcy process in 1998. Approximately eight years later,
Applicant again accrued delinquent debt. Neither the circumstances precipitating the
bankruptcy filing nor the circumstances leading to the accrual of delinquencies several
years later related to any extravagant spending. Conversely, they were not entirely
beyond Applicant’s control. Specifically, not all of the debts discharged in the
bankruptcy were business-related, and the 2004 divorce was only tangentially related to
her financial problems. In sum, however, these factors together with Applicant’s inability
to sell her home after the 2008 real estate market crash, and her six-month
unemployment constitute significant mitigating factors.
I remain perplexed at the small amount of money Applicant has designated per
month to pay her remaining credit card debt, particularly in light of the large sums of
money she paid each month to satisfy the other two credit card debts. On balance,
however, the steps taken thus far outweigh any lingering concern. Given the primary
cause of her financial problems and the steps she has taken to satisfy the two credit
card debts and to resolve her outstanding mortgages, I am confident she will satisfy the
one remaining debt. Upon considering this case in the context of the whole-person
concept, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concern. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
