 
 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
                    )   
            )   ISCR Case No. 09-02909 
             ) 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for alcohol consumption. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 18, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding2 that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
On May 8, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer to the SOR on May 27, 2010. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 25, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 16, 2010, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 5, 2010. During the hearing, I 
admitted 12 Government Exhibits (GE 1-12). Applicant testified and presented the 
testimony of one witness. I admitted six Applicant Exhibits (AE A-F). DOHA received 
the transcript (Tr.)3 on August 12, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 
2) 
                                                
Applicant is 56 years of age. In 1980, he accepted employment with a 
defense contractor in the information technology field and has worked for the same 
company for 30 years. Applicant earned a master’s degree in computer science in 
1985. He currently holds a secret security clearance, which he received in 1980. He 
married in 2001 and divorced in 2003.4 He is now single, but has been in a long-
term relationship since 2003. His girlfriend has three sons who, at the time of the 
hearing, were 17, 21, and 23 years of age. The younger son lives with Applicant and 
his girlfriend. (GE 1; PT 35;5 Tr. 4, 28, 31, 55, 81-8
 
Applicant first drank alcohol in 1970, at the age of 16. His history includes a 
few black-outs and some instances of reporting to work with a hangover. (PT 92-94) 
He usually drank alcohol after participating in sports games, or at bars with friends. 
In August 1984, he was charged with Driving While Intoxicated (DWI). At his arrest, 
his blood alcohol content (BAC) was 0.13. He pled guilty, spent 48 hours in jail, and 
received probation before judgment. He attended an educational program (Program 
A) for one hour per week, for four weeks. At his 2010 hearing, he estimated he 
stopped drinking for six months after the 1984 DUI. (GE 2; Tr. 56-63, 91) 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006, and apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after that date. The Adjudicative Guidelines 
supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
3 Applicant's counsel forwarded notice of minor errors in the transcript at Tr. 57, 78, 82, and 84. 
Department Counsel did not object to counsel’s corrections, and they are accepted as accurate.  
 
4 Applicant testified that he divorced in 2003, but listed his divorce date as 2005 in his security 
clearance application. (GE 1; Tr. 64) 
 
5 Applicant was the subject of a DOHA security clearance adjudication in 1993. The transcript of that 
hearing is cited as “previous transcript” (PT). The current (2010) hearing transcript is cited as “Tr. “ 
 2
 
In August 1988, Applicant was arrested for DWI. His BAC was 0.16. Before 
his court appearance, his attorney advised him to attend an alcohol program. 
Applicant entered Program B on September 22, 1988. He attended the program for 
two to three months. He was evaluated as being in “denial as to the extent of his 
substance abuse.” He was diagnosed with Alcohol Abuse-Episodic by a certified 
addiction counselor (CAC). Subsequently, at his court hearing, Applicant pled guilty 
and was sentenced to six months in jail, with all but 21 days suspended. He spent 
the 21 days in a work release program, which allowed him to attend work during the 
day, but required him to be incarcerated on nights and weekends. The court did not 
order him to attend alcohol treatment, and he stopped attending Program B after his 
court appearance. (GE 6, 9; PT 37-38, 83-85; Tr. 92-93) 
 
Applicant also appeared before the state Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) 
in regard to the 1988 DWI. As a result of having a second DWI conviction, the MVA 
revoked his driver’s license. It offered to shorten the revocation period if he attended 
an alcohol program. Applicant attended Program C, an educational program, for 16 
weeks in 1989. (PT 37-38, 79) 
 
On November 14, 1992, Applicant visited a series of bars, where he drank 
beer and whiskey. (PT 95-96) He was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Intoxicated (DWI). His BAC was 0.20. Six days after his arrest, on the advice of his 
attorney, Applicant entered Program D, at an inpatient alcohol rehabilitation center. 
(GE 2) He attended for four weeks, from November to December 1992. (PT 96-97) 
Applicant attended classes and group therapy, while maintaining his schedule at 
work. At his 1993 security clearance hearing, he testified that when he entered 
Program D, he considered himself an alcohol abuser, but “not an alcoholic.” (PT 97) 
He believed he simply had to avoid driving after drinking alcohol. (Tr. 65) At the 2010 
security clearance hearing, he testified that he did not admit in 1992 that he was an 
“alcoholic” because he did an excellent job at work; he never felt that he “needed” a 
drink; and because “that's the bad thing and you don't really want to be an alcoholic.” 
(GE 10; Tr. 63-66) However, during the treatment, the program director and 
treatment director stated that he “accurately self-assessed as having early stage 
alcoholism.” (GE 10; Tr. 96-97) The Program D counselor recommended Applicant 
attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), but noted Applicant's “strong resistance to AA.” 
Applicant asked for an alternative (PT 97-98) and the counselor recommended that 
he attend a relapse prevention program for one year. He also recommended 
Applicant submit to random breathalyzer tests, and abstain from alcohol. (GE 10; Tr. 
97) Applicant successfully completed the treatment, and his prognosis at release 
was “Good for the next six months, based on [Applicant's] incentive to change and to 
follow [the] plan outlined.” (GE 10) 
 
On March 26, 1993, Applicant was sentenced to one year incarceration for 
the 1992 DUI, with all but 30 days suspended. He was also sentenced to 18 months 
supervised probation. As part of the terms of his probation, he was required to 
abstain from alcohol during the period of probation. (PT 51) He was also required to 
 
 3
 
attend a relapse prevention program. In April 1993, Applicant entered a one-year 
alcohol program (Program E). Between April and August 1993, Applicant completed 
the 16-week relapse prevention portion of Program E. (GE 6; Tr. 64, 98) He worked 
with Counselor F, a certified chemical dependency counselor (CCDC). She 
administered the Michigan Alcohol Screening Test (MAST) to Applicant. It tests the 
severity of alcohol problems, and ranges from 0 to 24, with higher scores indicating 
the more severe problems. Applicant's score was 16, which indicated that he had 
some control, but did have a significant problem dealing with alcohol. (PT 156-158) 
Although Counselor F recommended AA, she noted that Applicant considered AA 
“too religious” and that he “absolutely will not go.” Based on meeting five of the ten 
criteria for a psychoactive substance-use disorder, he was diagnosed with Alcohol 
Dependence-Continuous. After completing the relapse prevention portion of the 
program, Applicant participated in individual therapy with Counselor F. He was to be 
discharged from Program E in April 1994. (GE 6, 11; Tr. 64, 97)  
 
In November 1993, a security clearance hearing was held in relation to 
Applicant's history of alcohol-related arrests. During the hearing, Applicant admitted 
he was an alcoholic. He had been abstinent for one year, and was on supervised 
probation that began in March 1993. He testified that he did not intend to drink 
alcohol in the future. His security clearance case was favorably adjudicated in 
January 1994. After being granted his security clearance, he continued Program E 
for about eight weeks. He did not complete the one-year program because he 
thought he could control his situation as long as he did not drive after drinking. He 
started drinking alcohol in about 1995, after his probation had ended, and two years 
after his security clearance hearing. (GE 6, 8; Tr. 68, 97, 100-101) 
 
In May 1998, Applicant was socializing at a bar, drinking beer. He might also 
have had whiskey. He believed he was not drunk and could drive safely. While 
driving home, he misjudged the distance while turning left and was hit by an 
oncoming car. He did not stop.6 He noted in his statement of August 2009, that he 
did not stop, and did not report the accident to his insurance company, because he 
had been drinking and driving. He parked a distance away from home and walked to 
his house in order to avoid being caught by the police. However, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI); DWI; 
Violating License Restriction; Failure to Yield Right of Way, and Failure to Stop after 
Accident Involving Damage to Attended Vehicle. On October 13, 1998, he agreed to 
a plea bargain in which he pled guilty to the lesser charge of DWI and the remaining 
charges were not prosecuted. He was fined and sentenced to 60 days incarceration, 
with 53 suspended. He was not ordered to attend treatment. His license was 
suspended for two years by the MVA. (GE 2, 3, Tr. 101-103) 
 
 
                                                
Several years later, in 2003, Applicant began a close relationship with his 
current girlfriend. She testified that she has worked for the federal government for 33 
years, has held a security clearance since 1978, and has been a security specialist 
since 1990. She began living with Applicant since 2005. They separated from June 
 
6 No injuries resulted to either party from the accident. (GE 2) 
 4
 
2007 to July 2008, but have been reunited since then. At times, she saw him 
consume alcohol to the point of being intoxicated. She believes that his alcohol 
issues stemmed from his failure to acknowledge that he had a problem. They both 
thought his weekend drinking was controllable. She believes he has now accepted 
his disease and knows he cannot drink alcohol at all. To her knowledge, he has not 
had alcohol since his 2007 DUI arrest. To support his sobriety, she has not 
consumed alcohol since August 2007. She confirmed that he attends AA about twice 
per week. She noted that he is honest and dependable, has an exemplary financial 
record, and is trustworthy and reliable. (AE A, D; Tr. 43-60) 
 
Applicant testified that he did not drink for about two years after the 1998 
accident and did not drive after drinking for five or six years. In his statement of 
August 2009, Applicant noted that he lost his focus and believed he could drive after 
drinking. In June 2007, his girlfriend had moved out of his home, and he was “down 
in the dumps.” On August 11, 2007, he had two beers at home, drove to a bar, had 
two more beers and one or two shots of whiskey. On the way home, he drove off the 
road and into a ditch. The car flipped upside down and landed on its roof. He was 
not injured. After his arrest on a DUI charge, he spent the night incarcerated, and 
was released on $5,000 bail. (GE 2; Tr. 36-37, 79-80, 102-103) 
 
On his attorney’s advice, Applicant enrolled in alcohol treatment Program F. 
He attended the 28-day in-patient rehabilitation program from August to September 
2007. He worked during the day, and attended group sessions, AA meetings, 
classes, and lectures at night. He was diagnosed with Alcohol Dependence-Binge 
Type. (GE 2; Tr. 72-73, 106) 
 
After successfully completing Program F, Applicant appeared in court on 
October 9, 2007. He pled guilty to Driving/Attempting to Drive While Impaired by 
Alcohol (DWI) (GE 3; Tr. 101-103) Applicant was sentenced to five months 
incarceration, with all but 70 days suspended, which he served in a work release 
program. He testified that his sentence of three years supervised probation started in 
December 2007 and ends December 2010.7 If he violates his probation 
requirements, his sentence of five months incarceration will be reinstated. At his 
MVA hearing, Applicant’s license was suspended for five years, but he is allowed to 
drive with an ignition interlock device, which will remain on his car for five years. The 
device prevents him from operating the car if it detects alcohol in his system. (GE 3; 
AE C; Tr. 85-87, 106) 
 
Applicant has been abstinent since his August 2007 DUI. He started attending 
AA in about early 2008, after completing his incarceration. At first, he attended three 
to four times per week, “But right now--right now, that I've been sober for three 
years, twice a week is good. I go to my home group every Tuesday, and then I'll go 
to--I'll pick up another meeting somewhere.” He acknowledges he is an alcoholic. He 
 
                                                 
7 The court record indicates that his probation ends February 7, 2011. Applicant believes this is an 
error. (GE 3; Tr. 104-105) 
 
 5
 
no longer participates in sports, or goes to bars. He has had an AA sponsor for the 
past two years, and has completed AA’s 12-step program. His relationship with his 
girlfriend has improved, and he testified that he would not return to alcohol use if the 
relationship ended. (Tr. 74-80, 84, 107) 
 
From January to June 2008, Applicant attended Program G, a five-month 
weekly outpatient treatment program. After successfully completing the program, his 
addiction counselor discharged him with a prognosis of “Good.” Before his current 
security clearance hearing, he met with the same counselor, a licensed clinical 
alcohol and drug counselor (LCADC). During the three visits between June and July 
2010, Applicant submitted negative breathalyzer and urinalysis screenings. The 
counselor submitted a letter for the current hearing. She stated that in 2008, 
Applicant participated freely in discussions and attended AA twice per week. His 
MAST score at the time was eight. His score indicated an improvement over the 
MAST score of 16 in 1993. She noted that after his fifth DUI in 2007, he “recognized 
that his alcohol abuse over the years had progressed to first-stage alcoholism.” She 
opined that he has taken positive steps toward maintaining abstinence, and that his 
prognosis is good, provided he remains active in AA. (GE 5; AE E) 
 
The record contains conflicting information about Applicant's efforts to 
abstain. After the 1988 DWI, Applicant informed the special agent at his security 
interview that he had no intention to drink alcohol in the future. (PT 87) At his 1993 
hearing, he said he abstained for about one month after the DWI. At the 2010 
hearing, however, he said he abstained about six months and that, “I always 
stopped drinking.” In contrast to this statement, he reported during Program D in 
1992 that he made “no attempt to ever stop using alcohol, and has no periods of 
abstinence.” (GE 10; PT 87, 94; Tr. 93) In his 2009 written statement, he said that 
after the 1988 DWI, “Eventually I fell into bad habits and, feeling I could handle the 
alcohol, started to drive again after drinking.” (GE 2; Tr. 93)  
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations for the periods of June 2003 through 
June 2010 8 indicate that he is a subject-matter expert who is highly valued for his 
contributions. There is no record evidence of security violations. In 2004, he 
received his company’s Excellence Award. Applicant provided numerous character 
reference letters from friends and co-workers. All of them were familiar with the SOR 
allegations. He was consistently described as honest, dependable, and trustworthy. 
A co-worker notes that, at work, he has never seen Applicant show indications of 
alcohol use, and that his loss would be detrimental to the program on which he 
works. Another co-worker commented that he was surprised to learn of Applicant's 
past, and believes Applicant's poor drinking-and-driving decisions are in stark 
contrast to his sound decision-making at work. During their business trips, he has 
not seen Applicant use alcohol. Applicant's first-level supervisor stated in his letter 
that Applicant informed him of his alcohol-related issues. Applicant has shown 
 
                                                 
8 The document dated June 2002 – May 2003 is a self-assessment rather than a management 
evaluation. (AE B (3)). 
 6
 
reliability, integrity and responsibility in his work performance, including during 
business trips. (AE A, B) 
 
Applicant's AA sponsor also submitted a letter. They were coworkers from 
2004 to 2007, and the sponsor was unaware that Applicant had problems with 
alcohol use. After the DUI in 2007, he became Applicant's sponsor. The sponsor 
describes Applicant as a highly conscientious and reliable person who has been 
sober since his 2007 DUI. He believes Applicant's ability to admit his failures will 
help him to maintain sobriety. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material 
information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).9 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the 
“whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them 
as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to 
classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under the Alcohol Consumption guideline.   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest10 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears 
the initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. 
Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the g Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a 
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.11  
 
 A person with access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the judgment, reliability 
and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly 
 
                                                 
9  Directive. 6.3. 
10 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 7
 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable 
doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.12 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern about alcohol consumption is that “excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21). 
 
AG ¶ 22 includes the following relevant conditions that can raise security 
concerns and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence; and 
 
 (f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant began drinking when he was a teenager, and has a decades-long 
history of using alcohol to intoxication. He was found guilty of driving while impaired 
or under the influence of alcohol five times between 1984 and 2007. These facts 
support application of AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). In 1988, a certified addiction counselor 
diagnosed Applicant with Alcohol Abuse-Episodic when he attended Program B. He 
did not complete the program. However, in 1993, he was diagnosed with Alcohol 
Dependence-Continuous by a certified chemical dependency counselor when he 
attended the relapse prevention program (Program E). He completed the relapse 
prevention segment of Program E. Applicant returned to drinking alcohol after each 
of these diagnoses. AG ¶¶ 22(d) and (f) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that can mitigate security concerns: 
 
                                                 
12 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 8
 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption 
or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant had five drunk-driving convictions over a 23-year period. His 
alcohol-related behavior was frequent: he consumed alcohol for years, and drank to 
the point that he displayed poor judgment by driving while intoxicated. His last DUI 
was three years ago, and he has abstained from alcohol consumption since that 
time. However, the fact that he repeatedly returned to alcohol use in the past, 
despite the serious and repeated negative effects it has caused, raises concerns 
that alcohol-related events may recur. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply.  
 
At his 2010 hearing, Applicant admitted that he is an alcoholic, and does not 
intend to drink alcohol in the future. He made both of these statements in his 1993 
hearing as well. He has refrained from using alcohol for the past three years, but his 
abstinence coincides with his period of probation for the 2007 conviction. He no 
longer frequents places where he used to drink, such as while playing sports and 
going to bars. Applicant receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant 
successfully completed alcohol programs. However, the fact that he needed such 
programs repeatedly demonstrates the strength of his denial. During several of his 
treatments, he was also highly resistant to participating in AA. More recently, he 
appears to accept it as a necessary part of his program of abstinence. He 
participates in AA, has a sponsor, and has completed the 12-step program. He also 
received a favorable prognosis from an LCADC in 2008 and 2010, conditioned on 
his continued attendance at AA.13 The positive prognoses are tempered by the fact 
that he received a good prognosis in the past, only to return to using alcohol. 
Applicant receives partial mitigation under AG ¶ 23(d). 
 
                                                 
13 Following the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence, I find that the counselors who provided diagnoses in 
1993 and 2010 are qualified professionals working for recognized alcohol treatment programs. See 
ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). 
 9
 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light 
of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old, and has been consuming alcohol since he was a 
teenager. Between 1984 and 2008, he was convicted five times for driving under the 
influence of alcohol. He attended seven alcohol programs, some educational, some 
therapeutic. He always did well during his alcohol treatment programs, and has 
received good prognoses. Since 2007, Applicant has made commendable strides 
toward leading an alcohol-free life. His partner does not drink, and Applicant no 
longer participates in the activities where he often drank alcohol. He admits he is an 
alcoholic, attends AA, has a sponsor, and has completed the 12-step portion of the 
program. He has been abstinent for three years.  
 
 However, Applicant has experienced numerous negative life events resulting 
from excessive alcohol use: fines and attorney fees, jail time, driving restrictions, and 
the threat to his livelihood. Despite these negative effects, Applicant repeatedly 
returned to using alcohol. His history between 1984 and 2007 demonstrates a 
repetitive pattern: excessive drinking, DUI arrest, immediate entrance into an alcohol 
program before trial, conviction, abstinence during probation, a period of increased 
drinking, returning to driving after drinking, followed by a DUI arrest. This general 
pattern has occurred five times. His drunk-driving arrests have been four to six years 
apart, other than the 2007 arrest, which occurred nine years later. It is also troubling 
that Applicant's periods of abstinence generally coincide with the periods when he 
must abstain from alcohol in order to ensure he does not violate his probation. His 
 
 10
 
 11
 
abstinence for the past three years coincides with his current probation for the 2007 
conviction, which will end in December 2010.  
 
 After Applicant's first three drunk-driving convictions and subsequent 
treatment, he testified at his security clearance hearing that he realized he was an 
alcoholic, and that he had been successfully treated and had no intention to use 
alcohol again. His security clearance was granted. He did not adhere to his stated 
intention to avoid alcohol, and since then, he has had two drunk-driving convictions, 
and two more series of alcohol treatments. His drunk-driving incidents have become 
more serious, with both the 1998 and 2007 events involving accidents that could 
have resulted in serious injury. Based on Applicant's long history of alcohol 
problems, and his pattern of relapses, I cannot confidently conclude that he will not 
lapse in the future as he has in the past. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.g.  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access 
to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
