                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 09-00400 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
I have carefully reviewed the administrative file, pleadings, and exhibits in this 
case and conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the 
Financial Considerations adjudicative guideline. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) on May 20, 
2008. On April 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On June 15, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She requested that 
her case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 9, 2010. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10. By letter dated September 10, 2010, a copy 
of the Form was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
September 26, 2010. Her response to the FORM was due on October 26, 2010. She did 
not file any additional information or objections within the required time period. The case 
was assigned to me for a decision on December 8, 2010. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR is comprised of 19 allegations that raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG F, Financial Considerations. Eighteen allegations raised financial delinquency 
concerns totaling $34,443, and one allegation recited that Applicant, who petitioned for 
bankruptcy in October 2005, received a discharge in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 
2006. (Item 1.) 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted her 2006 discharge in bankruptcy 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) and eight financial delinquencies totaling $30,449 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.f., 1.h., 
1.j., 1.k., 1.m., 1.p., and 1.s.); she denied five debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.i., 1.n., 1.q., and 
1.r.). She gave qualified admissions to five allegations, which the Government 
considered to be de facto denials (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., 1.g., 1.l., and 1.o.). Applicant’s 
admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 4 at 4-6.) 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old, never married, and the parent of two children, a 
daughter who is approximately 17 years old, and a son who is approximately eleven 
years old.1 She is a high school graduate and completed one year of junior college 
study. She recently joined a National Guard unit. (Item 4 at 4; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 The record reflects that Applicant was unemployed for two months in 2008 before 
assuming her current job. She was also unemployed for three months in 2007. Since 
May 2008, she has been employed in customer service by a Government contractor. 
She seeks a trustworthiness determination for the first time. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. The SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s delinquent debts were discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2006 (SOR ¶ 
1.a.). When she filed for bankruptcy in 2005, Applicant reported total assets of $1,367 
and total liabilities of $195,378. In a November 2008 interview with an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), she reported that 
she was living “paycheck to paycheck,” but staying current with her bills. Her credit 
bureau report of May 2008 revealed that Applicant owed an automobile creditor 
approximately $16,514 resulting from an automobile repossession. In April 2009, in 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant acknowledged the debt and stated: “I am 
negotiating payment amount. I do not owe this much. Waiting for itemized list of 
charges. Company is not cooperating with me.” The delinquent debt, which grew to 
$19,579 and which also appears on Applicant’s credit reports of March 2010 and 
1 Applicant’s Schedule I on her 2005 bankruptcy petition lists her children’s ages as 12 and six, as of 
November 9, 2005. She did not list her children on her SF-85P. (Item 5 at 5; Item 7 at 42.) 
3 
 
                                                          
September 2010, is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
that the debt had not been satisfied. Additionally, Applicant asserted that she was 
paying the creditor $580 a month by payroll allotment. However, she failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate her assertion. (Item 4 at 5; Item 6 at 25; Item 7 at 16; Item 
8 at 1; Item 9 at 1; Item 10.) 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a delinquent debt of $600 but failed 
to provide documentation corroborating payment. The record does not establish that the 
debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c., has been satisfied. (Item 4 at 4.) 
 
Applicant admitted a $393 debt in collection status (SOR ¶ 1.f.) and a $8,997 
charged-off debt (SOR ¶ 1.s.).She stated she was “working on paying” the debt alleged 
at SOR ¶ 1.f. and was paying $100 monthly on the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.s. However, 
she failed to provide documentation to corroborate her claims of payment. (Item 4 at 4-
6.) 
 
Applicant admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.j., and 1.p. She stated 
that she would pay those debts in the future. She also admitted the delinquent debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.m. and stated she “need[ed] to do some research to find out how to 
pay this debt off.” 2(Item 4 at 5-6.) 
 
Applicant admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.g., 1.l., and 1.o. She 
stated further that the debts were hers but had been paid. Applicant’s admissions were 
treated as de facto denials. However, Applicant failed to provide documentation 
corroborating her assertions that the debts had been paid. (Item 4 at 4-5.) 
 
Applicant admitted the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. She asserted that the debt had 
been discharged in her 2006 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. I also treated this admission as a 
de facto denial. The record includes the Schedule F (Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Nonpriority Claims) that Applicant filed in her bankruptcy case. The debt listed in SOR 
allegation 1.d. does not appear on Applicant’s Schedule F or on other bankruptcy 
schedules listing debts owed to other classes of creditors.3 However, the debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. appears on Applicant’s credit report of May 30, 2008. The credit report 
shows the debt arose in 2007, after Applicant’s debts were discharged in the 2006 
bankruptcy. (Item 4 at 4; Item 7; Item 10 at 10.)  
 
Applicant denied the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.i., 1.n., 1.q., and 1.r. In her personal 
subject interview in November 2008, Applicant stated she did not recognize the $60 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. but would contact the creditor and pay the debt if she owed it.  
The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.i. appear on Applicant’s credit report of May 30, 
2008. The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.n. and 1.q. are listed are listed on Applicant’s 
credit reports of March 12, 2010, and September 9, 2010. The delinquent debt alleged 
2 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. is for $72. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. is for $60. The debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.m. is for $40. 
 
3 See  Item 7, Schedules D and E, at 23-27. 
4 
 
4, 26.) 
                                                          
at SOR ¶ 1.r. is listed on Applicant’s credit report of March 12, 2010. (Item 4 at 4-6; Item 
6 at 24; Item 8; Item 9; Item 10.)       
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories and an inquiry by the OPM investigator, 
Applicant provided personal financial information. Her net monthly income includes her 
take-home pay of $1,743 and $200 in child support, for a total of $1,943.4 Her fixed 
monthly living expenses total approximately $1,761 and are as follows: rent: $600; 
groceries: $200-$250; utilities: $150; cell phone: $140; gasoline: $160; auto loan: $386; 
and auto insurance: $100. Additionally, she reported that she paid $300 each month on 
two debts.5 Applicant’s financial information indicates that her monthly expenses 
exceed her regular monthly income by approximately $124. (Item 6 at 10, 2
 
The record does not establish that Applicant has had financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, the administrative judge must apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
4 Applicant stated that she worked overtime when the opportunity was available to her. She reported she 
could earn $200 to $400 in extra overtime income each month. (Item 6 at 25.)  
 
5 It is not clear from the record how Applicant’s current finances are affected by the $580 payroll allotment 
she stated in her Answer to the SOR that she was paying to satisfy the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.k. 
(Item 4 at 5.) 
5 
 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
trustworthiness concerns. While Applicant admitted allegations of financial delinquency 
on the SOR and claimed to have satisfied several other alleged delinquent debts, she 
provided no documentation to corroborate payment or to establish that the alleged 
6 
 
debts were not hers. Moreover, she denied several debts alleged on the SOR which 
were listed on her credit reports. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted.) Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, her SF 85P, her interview with the OPM investigator, and her SOR 
response. In 2006, Applicant’s debts were discharged in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Since 
about 2007, Applicant accumulated considerable delinquent debt and was unable to pay 
or satisfy her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions identified at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
Applicant=s current financial delinquencies began in about 2007. While her financially 
delinquent behavior began several years ago, it continues unresolved at the present 
time, is likely to recur, and casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.  Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶20(a) does not apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), mitigation can occur where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s admitted 
financial delinquencies began in 2007 and continue to the present. While Applicant was 
unemployed for two months in 2008 and three months in 2007, she offered no 
explanation for her failure to resolve or settle her financial delinquencies during the past 
2½ years when she has been steadily employed. I conclude that she failed to act 
responsibly in identifying and resolving her debts, some of which were for small 
amounts. I find that AG ¶ 20(b) applies only in part as a factor for consideration in this 
case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant failed to provide documentation to corroborate her 
7 
 
statements that she had paid or was paying delinquent debts alleged on the SOR. The 
record does not reflect that she has received financial counseling. Moreover, her current 
monthly budget shows a deficit of approximately $124, making consistent future 
payments unlikely. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply to 
the facts of Applicant’s case.  AG ¶¶ 20 (e) and 20 (f) are not raised by the facts of this 
case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In 2006, Applicant received a fresh 
start under the bankruptcy law to follow a financially prudent course and satisfy her 
debts in a timely manner. She has had a steady job with the same employer for over 2 
years. Since 2007, she has accumulated over $30,000 in new delinquent debts. She 
has failed to demonstrate that her financial problems will not continue to be a 
trustworthiness concern in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.s.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
