1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-01341
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I deny
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on August 2, 2008. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR)  on December 21, 2009, detailing security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) that provided the basis
for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September
1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; Tr. 19, 32.2
GE 1; Tr. 19-20.3
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 1, 2010. He answered the
SOR in writing and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received
the request and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 2, 2010, and I
received the case assignment on August 11, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
August 30, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 15, 2010.
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 22, 2010. I held the record open until
September 30, 2010, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. The record
closed on September 30, 2010.
Procedural Ruling
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice less than 15 days before the hearing. (Tr.
10.) I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice. (Id.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.i
of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. He denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 2.a-2.c of the SOR  After a complete and thorough review of the1
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 37 years old, works in security for a Department of Defense
contractor. He began his employment with his current employer in October 2005. He is
required to work outside the United States ten months of the year.2
Applicant graduated from high school and worked in the trucking industry for
many years. He married in 1996. He has three children, ages 16, 13, and 9.  3
GE 7; Tr. 25.4
 Response to SOR; GE 2; Tr. 22. 5
GE 2; GE 4; AE B; Tr. 23.6
Response to SOR; GE 4 - GE 6; Tr. 23, 24-25.7
GE 2; Tr. 24-25.8
3
Applicant and his wife filed for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 13 of the
bankruptcy code in April 2000 because his wife lost her job and they could not pay their
bills. The court dismissed their petition in August 2000. Applicant indicated that they
could not afford the monthly payments established by the court.4
When his wife lost her job in 2000, Applicant could not longer afford the monthly
payments on his car, which was repossessed later that year. The creditor filed a court
action to recover the money owed and obtained a judgment against Applicant in
September 2005. Applicant has not paid this $20,000 judgment. He advised the Office
of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator that he contacted the creditor to resolve
the debt, but the creditor rejected his offer, and he could not afford the creditor’s
suggested payment. He did not mention this offer at the hearing.  (SOR ¶ 1.c)5
In 2005, his wife did not make her car payments and her car was repossessed.
Because this loan account was a joint debt, the creditor filed suit against Applicant and
his wife and obtained a judgment against them in January 2007. The creditor collected
the judgment money through a garnishment of his wife’s paycheck. This judgment was
paid in full as of February 2010.  (SOR ¶ 1.d)6
Applicant defaulted on two additional debts listed in the SOR many years ago.
The date of last activity for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,757) is December 2001 and for
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($3,561) is March 2002. Under State statute of limitations law, the
creditor is barred from collecting these debts. These debts are listed on the August 12,
2008 credit report, but they are not listed on the May 20, 2009 and the October 26, 2009
credit reports. The debts may have been removed from the credit reports because of
age as Applicant admitted that these debts are his and that he has not paid these
debts.7
At the hearing Applicant indicated that he contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.h
($3,561) to develop a payment plan, but could not reach an agreement. He did not give
a date for this contact. He advised the OPM investigator that he had not contacted this
creditor to resolve the debt.8
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($274), 1.b ($242), and 1.g ($435) occurred between
January 2005 and December 2006. Under State statute of limitations law, the creditor is
barred from collecting these debts. The debts are listed on all the credit reports of
Response to the SOR; GE 4- GE 6; AE A; Tr. 20-22, 24.9
GE 2; GE 4-GE 6.10
GE 3; AE C; AE D; Tr. 31.11
GE 2; Tr. 25, 31.12
4
record. Applicant admitted that these debts are his and that he has not paid these
debts. Applicant paid the $83 debt in SOR ¶ 1.f.9
The credit reports reflect that Applicant is current on his monthly bills, his car
payment, and his mortgage, and that he has been for several years. Applicant
acknowledged that he did not contact the creditors listed in the SOR when he was in the
United States because it took too much time. During his interview with the OPM
investigator in December 2008, he indicated that he was saving approximately $6,000 a
month. The credit reports show that he obtained a mortgage in December 2009.10
When overseas, Applicant earns $10,615 a month in gross income and $8,956 a
month in net income. His gross income and net income for the first pay period in
September 2010 declined by $1,700 when he traveled to the United States in late
August 2010. His wife earns $2,713 a month in gross income and $2,196 a month in net
income. His total net household income when he is overseas $11,152 a month, and
when he is in the United States, his net household income totals approximately $7,700.
His monthly expenses average $5,500 to $6,000. He has sufficient income each month
to resolve his unpaid debts.11
Applicant has not had financial counseling. When asked why he has not resolved
his debts, he answered that it was time-consuming to do. He also stated that if he did
not do it, it did not get done.12
When he completed his e-QIP on August 2, 2008, Applicant answered “no” to the
following questions:
Section 27. Your Financial Record
a.  In the last 7 years, have you had your wages garnished
or had any property repossessed for any reason?
d. In the last 7 years, have you had any judgments against
you that have not been paid?
Section 28. Your Financial Delinquencies
a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days
delinquent on any debt(s)?
The SOR stated question b in Section 28 as “In the last 7 years, have you been over 90 days delinquent on13
any debt(s)?” The security clearance application question asks if an Applicant is currently over 90 days
delinquent on any debt(s)? This is the question Applicant answered and the question to be addressed in this
decision.
Tr. 25-27.14
5
b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any
debt(s)?13
Because his car was repossessed in 2000, he thought the question asked for 7
years, and it was 2008, Applicant stated he answered “no” question a in Section 27. He
did not list the repossession of his wife’s car because it was paid. He did not know
about the judgments until the OPM investigator talked to him about these debts.
Concerning his answers to the questions in Section 28, Applicant indicated that he was
overseas and did not have access to a credit report. Thus, he answered “no” to these
questions. 14
Applicant’s testimony at the hearing and his statements to the OPM investigator
reflect that he does not remember dates accurately. He does not have a clear
understanding of the actions he took with each creditor, only an understanding that he
made contact with one of his creditors.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
6
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems about 10 years ago when his
wife lost her job. His income was insufficient to pay all the household bills. These two
disqualifying conditions apply.
7
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and especially the following:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The largest of Applicant’s debt listed in the SOR occurred 8 to 10 years ago
when his wife lost her job and his income was insufficient to pay all the household bills.
However, her job loss does not explain the reason for the nonpayment of the other
debts, which occurred later. He has not received financial counseling. Except for two
debts, SOR ¶¶1.d and 1.f, he has not resolved the remaining debts listed in the SOR.
AG ¶ 20(c) applies to the judgment debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d, and to the debt listed in
SOR ¶ 1.f as the evidence of record reflects that he paid these debts.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and in this case,
the following condition may be disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining the holding in ISCR Case No. 02-15
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
8
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
For AG DC ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission, concealment or falsification in
his answer must be deliberate. The Government established that Applicant omitted
material facts from his e-QIP when he answered “no” to Questions b and d in Section
27, which asked if in the last 7 years: “. . .  have you had your wages garnished or had
any property repossessed for any reason?” and “. . . have you had any judgments
against you that have not been paid?” He did not disclose the repossessions of his car
in 2000 and his wife’s car in 2005. The Government also established that he omitted
material facts when he answered “no” to Questions a and b in Section 28, which asked
about debts more than 180 days delinquent and current debts 90 days delinquent. This
information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security
clearance and to his honesty. In his response to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant
denied, however, that he had an intent to hide information about his finances from the
Government. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the
burden of proving the omission was deliberate. Proof of an omission, standing alone,
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission
occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to
determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s
intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.15
Applicant completed his e-QIP in August 2008. His car was repossessed in 2000,
more than 7 years before he completed the e-QIP. Applicant did not list his wife’s
repossessed car because the debt had been paid. While he should have listed this
repossession, his reasoning that it was paid, and as such, he did not have to list the
repossession does not show a deliberate intent to hide the information from the
government, but rather a misunderstanding of what is required in his response.
Applicant was not aware of either judgment against him when he completed his e-QIP,
although he was aware that his wife had paid on her car repossession through
garnishment. Thus, the requisite intent is not established. 
Since he began his current employment, he has made sufficient income to pay
his monthly bills and he has. Thus, his “no” answer to Question b in Section 28 was not
an attempt to hide current delinquencies from the Government. Concerning the question
on debts more than 180 days overdue, Applicant did not have his credit report to
determine if any such debts exist. He had been working overseas for many months and
was without ready access to his credit reports. During his lengthy stay overseas, his
wife assumed responsibility for payment of  household bills and did not advised him of
problems. Without his credit report, he could not determine the status of his debts. He
did not intentionally deceive the Government about his very old debts. The Government
has not established that Applicant intentionally falsified his answers on his e-QIP.
Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant.
9
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 200). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
10
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems first began when his wife lost her job in 2000. When he stopped his
monthly payments, his car was repossessed. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in an
effort to gain control of his finances, but could not afford the monthly payment required
by the court.  His finances have improved in recent years, but he has not made an effort
to pay three of the four small debts listed in the SOR, even though he acknowledges
that these debts are his and he earns more than $8,000 a month.
Other than the two judgments, the unpaid debts listed in the SOR are barred
from collection under state law because the unpaid debts are between four and ten
years old. However, the Appeal Board has held that the elimination of a debt under a
statute of limitations does not show a good faith resolution of a debt, a holding with
which I have always agreed. In the instant case, Applicant’s current monthly finances
are timely paid. He has not paid three small debts listed in the SOR, which he can easily
afford to pay.  Applicant has not taken any action on the $20,000 judgment, which is still
a viable debt. As of the hearing, he had no plans to try and resolve the debt. Because
he has not taken any action on this debt or his other unpaid debts, and he has the
financial resources to resolve some of these debts, I find that he has not resolved the
Government’s security concerns about his finances.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct under
Guideline E, but he has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances
under Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
11
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
