 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06385 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephanie N. Mendez, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, 
Alcohol Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 18, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 17, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, offered one witness, and presented 
exhibits (AE) A-Q. Applicant’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is single and has no children. Since May 2009, he 
has worked as systems analyst for a defense contractor. He has a master’s degree.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) consuming alcohol, to the 
point of intoxication, from about 1984 (when he was 19 years old) to 2007 (admitted); 
(2) being arrested, charged and pleading guilty to driving under the influence (DUI) in 
November 2002 (admitted); (3) being arrested, charged and pleading guilty to driving 
under the influence in November 2007 (admitted); and, (4) the two driving while 
intoxicated incidents were cross alleged by the Government as criminal conduct 
(admitted). 
  
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was 19 years old. He drank socially 
with friends on weekends. Typically, he consumed two or three 12-ounce beers on 
these occasions. He had moved out of his parent’s house and was living in the city 
where he attended college when he started drinking. More recently, Applicant 
consumed alcohol approximately three times a week. This occurred mostly on the 
weekends at a sports bar where he would socialize and watch ballgames. He consumed 
several 12 ounce beers during these occasions. He drove after drinking.2  
 
 In November 2002, Applicant was drinking at a local bar. He drank several 12-
ounce beers and then, after a friend arrived, he started drinking martinis. He left the bar 
alone in the early evening. He proceeded to drive home. On the way home, his car hit 
some road debris causing a flat tire. A motorist stopped to assist Applicant, noticed the 
Applicant appeared to be intoxicated, and called the police. The police arrived and gave 
Applicant a breath test, which reflected a .23 blood-alcohol level. Applicant was arrested 
for driving under the influence, among other charges. Applicant pled guilty to the driving 
under the influence charge and all other charges were dropped. He was sentenced to 
community service, a fine, six-month attendance at alcohol awareness classes, loss of 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-30; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3; Tr. at 30. 
 
 
3 
 
 
license for 30 days, and five years probation. Applicant completed all the conditions of 
his sentence. Applicant admitted that he drank alcohol and then drove his car while he 
was on probation for this DUI offense.3  
 
 In November 2007, shortly after his probation ended, Applicant was at a local 
sports bar on a Sunday watching ballgames. He drank about nine mixed drinks over a 
four hour time frame. Later, he left the bar alone to go home. While driving his car out of 
the parking lot, he turned out onto the street. He pulled out in front of a police car that 
immediately stopped him. He admitted to the officer that he had been drinking. 
Applicant was then taken to the police station where his blood was drawn. His blood-
alcohol level registered at .18. He was arrested for driving under the influence. He once 
again pled guilty to the DUI charge and was sentenced to community service, a fine, 12 
months suspended driver’s license, 18 months attendance at an alcohol awareness 
program, and five years probation. He has completed all these terms except for the 
probation which will end in November 2012.4  
 
 Applicant stopped drinking shortly after his November 2007 DUI arrest. He has 
been sober, without a drink, for 28 months. He completed the court-mandated alcohol 
awareness program and is a regular attendee at Alcohol Anonymous (AA) meetings. He 
feels very strongly about the AA philosophy and is using it in his life to maintain sobriety. 
He has an AA sponsor and is working the AA 12-step program. He has no desire to 
drink again and plans on continuing his AA participation. He signed a letter of intent 
vowing never to use alcohol again. His AA sponsor testified that Applicant has attended 
AA twice a week for the last two-and-a-half years. He believes Applicant is honest and 
exercises good judgment. There is no evidence of a formal medical diagnosis for 
Applicant as either alcohol dependent or as an alcohol abuser.5  
 
 Applicant is supported by numerous character letters attesting to his honesty, 
trustworthiness, and integrity. The president of his current company wholeheartedly 
supports Applicant’s clearance request having full knowledge of Applicant’s alcohol 
history. Applicant is viewed as a valued employee.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 30-35, 57; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 35-38, 67; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 22-27, 37-41; AE I, J, Q. 
 
6 AE A-D, K, L, P. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 Applicant’s two DUI arrests and his pattern of drinking through November of 2007 
support the application of both AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (b). 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 Applicant has abstained from alcohol use for 28 months. He is committed to a life 
of sobriety and AA participation. He was supported by his AA sponsor who explained 
Applicant’s participation in AA. He is viewed as reliable, trustworthy, and as having good 
judgment by his company’s president. I find that sufficient time has passed since his last 
alcohol-related incident and none of the incidents cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment in view of his changed lifestyle and commitment to 
sobriety. Moreover, Applicant acknowledged that he was an alcohol abuser and, 
therefore, committed himself to abstinence and full AA participation. I find both AG ¶¶ 
23(a) and (b). 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to two DUI offenses and he remains on probation for the 
most recent DUI conviction. I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s commitment to a sober lifestyle and his 28 months of abstinence 
demonstrate successful rehabilitation and a sufficient passage of time. Both mitigating 
conditions apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s age, 
education, his probationary status, his period of alcohol abstinence, his commitment to 
AA, and his character references. Applicant discovered that his alcohol related lifestyle 
led to bad decisions that culminated in criminal action. After his second DUI, Applicant 
became serous about his sobriety and became committed to AA. He has complied with 
all the terms of his probation. I am convinced that Applicant understands the importance 
of his sobriety and is committed to it.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
