 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01727 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 3, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 16, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
September 23, 2010. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through JJ, which were 
admitted without objection, called two witnesses, and testified on her own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 6, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is single and 
has three adult children. She possesses a bachelor’s degree from an American 
university. She has held a security clearance for approximately 20 years, first as a 
civilian employee of the Air Force, and later as a government contractor. She also has a 
real estate broker’s license issued July 2006. (GE 1; AE W; AE GG; Tr. 49-53, 74.) 
 
 The SOR alleges one delinquent mortgage debt, as listed on credit reports 
obtained in 2009 and 2010. In 2005, Applicant purchased a home for $625,000. She 
financed the home through a first mortgage of approximately $490,000 and a home 
equity line of credit (HELOC), originally for $70,000 (the line of credit extended up to 
$136,000, which she later utilized). At the time she acquired the loans, her income was 
$227,000 a year. (GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; GE 8; Tr. 54-56.) 
 
 The first mortgage, alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a., was a five-year adjustable 
rate mortgage (ARM). Knowing that her interest rate would soon adjust on her first 
mortgage, Applicant contacted her lender in June of 2009 to refinance the loan. She did 
not qualify for a refinance at that time. She continued making payments on her first 
mortgage until August 2009. In August 2009, she needed car repairs and was unable to 
make her first mortgage payment. She has not made a payment on her first mortgage 
since that time, despite claiming that she had the funds available to make payments in 
September through December of 2009. In 2010, the mortgage rates adjusted under the 
ARM and her payments due increased from $2,500 a month to $3,900 a month. The 
home currently appraises at $449,500. (GE 2; GE 3; AE 1; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE 
M; AE N; AE O; AE S; Tr. 54-65.) 
 
 Applicant was current on her HELOC loan until July 2010. The balance on this 
loan is now $171,000. She had worked out a temporary loan modification program with 
the lender on this loan. However, she stopped payments in July 2010 because she no 
longer qualified for the modification due to defaulting on her first mortgage. She has not 
made a payment on her HELOC loan since July 2010. (GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 55-56, 66, 81.) 
 
 In approximately January of 2010, Applicant hired a company to audit her 
mortgage. She interpreted the Securitization Report, done by the audit company, to 
indicate that the lender no longer owns her loan. A foreclosure of the property, by the 
first mortgage holder, was scheduled for April 2010. Applicant requested an injunction 
stopping the foreclosure, based upon the audit company report. An injunction was not 
issued by the court, but Applicant was successful in temporarily halting the sale by 
talking to the auctioneer, trustee, and other individuals. She continues to pursue an 
injunction and other relief in a law suit filed in state court, alleging that the lender 
foreclosing on her property does not own the note. In September 2010, Applicant also 
filed a petition in U.S. District Court, alleging that the lender had no legal standing to 
 
3 
 
bring foreclosure claims against her property and has no interest in her property, among 
other claims. Applicant asserts that the lender in SOR allegation 1.a. has been “paid 
off.” However, the documentation from the audit show that “FURTHER 
INVESTIGATION IS REQUIRED” and that the report was “not a forensic analysis.” 
Applicant failed to provide a title report or other evidence to support her claims. She did 
admit that she was indebted to a lender for the home, but indicated that she did not 
know who the proper creditor was. (GE 1; GE 4; AE A; AE H; AE P; AE Q; AE R; AE JJ; 
Tr. 66-82.) 
 
 Applicant asserted that her income has consistently decreased since 2005. In 
2006, it fell to $136,329; and by 2009 she was only make an annual salary of $119,149. 
Her budget shows that she can not afford to make the payments at the current rate of 
$3,900 per month. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE G; Tr. 57.) 
 
 Applicant has invested the money that she would have spent on her mortgage 
payments into a property she holds jointly with her mother. She has also spent a 
significant amount of money on the audits of her mortgage. However, she still occupies 
the home. She has not attempted to sell or rent the property. (Tr. 69, 101.) 
 
 Applicant’s two witnesses, her boyfriend and her manager, attested to her 
trustworthiness. She also presented eleven letters of recommendation from co-workers, 
supervisors, and friends. These letters indicate Applicant is “trustworthy” and “honest.” 
Her performance evaluations indicate that she “meets, exceeds, and far exceeds” 
expectations in her daily tasks. Additionally, she has received numerous awards and 
certificates from her employer and clients. She also is a member of a city development 
plan and does other volunteer work and community service activities. (AE V; AE X; AE 
Y; AE Z; AE AA; AE BB; AE CC; AE DD; AE EE; AE FF; AE HH; AE II; Tr. 86-100.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent mortgage debt and is unable or unwilling to 
pay her obligations. While she may contest who the debt is owed to, she admits that 
 
5 
 
she is indebted on her home. She has not made any payments on her primary 
mortgage since August 2009. Her budget shows she cannot afford the payment at its 
current interest rate. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant took out the mortgage alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. to finance the 
purchase of her home. She agreed to the loan, knowing that the ARM would eventually 
increase her monthly payments. Applicant has a real estate broker’s licenses and has a 
higher degree of knowledge of the risk involved in such transactions. When she 
discovered she could no longer afford the payments, and was not able to get a loan 
modification, she defaulted on the loan. This behavior is not responsible. She continued 
her irresponsible actions by spending the money that she should have saved for her 
mortgage payments. She claimed she had the money for the payments in September 
through December of 2009, but chose to spend it in other ways, like her property 
investment. Thus, her financial difficulties can not be attributed solely to her declining 
income. She has done nothing to indicate that the problem is under control or that she 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not mitigating.  
 
 Applicant disputes the validity of her indebtedness to the creditor listed in 
allegation 1.a., but she does not deny that she has an underlying mortgage debt that is 
not being paid. This forum is not the proper place to litigate the validity of her civil 
 
6 
 
claims. Overall, her dispute over the legitimacy of her debt does not mitigate her poor 
judgment in defaulting on her mortgage and spending her mortgage money on an 
investment property. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by her colleagues, managers, and friends. She has 
earned recognition for her exceptional work performance through awards and 
certificates. She gives her time and resources to community service. Yet, she has made 
several questionable financial choices that do not demonstrate the judgment, reliability, 
or trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. Not only is she delinquent on 
the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a., but she has also become delinquent on her 
HELOC loan. She did not demonstrate any attempt to resolve this additional $171,000 
debt. There are significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s finances and 
judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
