 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04964 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on March 12, 2010. On September 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 DOHA received Applicant’s undated Answer to the SOR on October 1, 2010. 
With her Answer, Applicant requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 27, 2010. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6. On October 28, 2010, 
DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
file on November 11, 2010. She timely provided two documents in response to the 
FORM. The Government did not object to Applicant’s documents. On December 10, 
2010, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I admitted the two documents that 
Applicant filed in response to the FORM as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges: “You used marijuana, 
approximately twice a year, from December 2005 to at least December 2009.” SOR ¶ 
1.b. alleges: “You plan to continue using marijuana.” SOR ¶ 1.c. alleges: “You used 
ecstasy one time in May 2007.” SOR ¶ 1.d. alleges: “Due to the facts alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a. and/or 1.b. above, 50 U.S.C. §435c disqualifies you from having a 
security clearance granted or renewed by the Department of Defense.” In her Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. She denied the 
allegation at SOR ¶ 1.b. She neither admitted nor denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.d.1  
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old, never married, and has no children. Since September 
2007, she has been employed as a graduate fellow by a government contractor. She 
seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant graduated from college with honors and received a Bachelor 
of Science degree. In her Answer to the SOR, she described her character and 
academic achievements as follows: 
 
More generally, I would like to attest to my own good judgment and 
reliability by pointing out that I am a high-achieving young person with 
strong drive and motivation. I graduated college early with honors, 
secured a job directly out of college at one of the most prestigious 
corporate law firms in the United States, and then was accepted to a 
competitive doctoral program. At 25, I have fulfilled the requirements for a 
Master’s degree, and I am in the process of completing a dissertation for 
PhD, something which very few young people can boast. My 
achievements would not have been possible if [it] were not for my good 
judgment at a young age, as well as reliability and responsibility.  
 
(Item 4 at 2; Item 5.) 
 
1 SOR ¶ 1.d. is not an allegation per se. Instead, it is a legal conclusion reached by assuming the truth of 
facts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. I interpret Applicant’s failure to respond to SOR allegation 1.d. as a 
denial.   
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 On March 12, 2010, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 23a on the e-QIP 
asks the following question: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, speed, 
crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants 
(toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.), or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting 
with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance. “(Item 5 at 44; italics in original 
omitted.) 
 
 Applicant responded “Yes” to question 23a and provided additional information. 
Applicant reported that she used marijuana from about December 2005 to “Present.” 
Applicant also reported that in about May 2007, she used MDMA (ecstasy) once with 
her sister and a friend. Of her marijuana use, she stated: “Occasionally use with sister 
when traveling home for holidays. Always used within confines of family dwelling, never 
in public – always with family. Approximate number of uses is somewhere between 5 – 
15.” (Item 5 at 45.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed about her illegal drug use by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on April 9, 2010.2 In 
the personal subject interview, as summarized by the investigator, Applicant stated that 
she used marijuana two times a year “from 12/5 to the present.” She explained that she 
smoked marijuana from a glass pipe with her sister when she returned to her family 
home for holidays. She told the investigator that after smoking marijuana she 
experienced an intense body high that was a positive experience. She reported that she 
experimented with ecstasy in the company of her sister and experienced negative side 
effects. Applicant stated that her last use of marijuana was in December 2009. 
Additionally, Applicant stated that she had no plans to use marijuana more than two 
times a year, and she also had no plans to stop using marijuana. However, she told the 
investigator she would stop using the drug “in order to keep a job or security clearance.”  
(Item 7 at 4.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she told the investigator that she 
“had no current plans to discontinue” her marijuana use. She further explained that she 
never actively sought to acquire marijuana. Applicant then provided the following 
description of her illegal drug use: 
 
Regarding my use of marijuana in subparagraph (a) of the [SOR], as well 
as my use of ecstasy in subparagraph (c) of the [SOR], while I do not deny 
these statements, I do not believe that this should be a cause for security 
concern. I have only ever used marijuana, or ecstasy on the one case, in 
the presence of my close family or long-time friend(s). Although I have 
 
2 On July 21, 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant confirmed the accuracy of the 
information in the investigator’s report.  (Item 6 at 3-4.) 
 
4 
 
 
been offered the use of marijuana before by strangers or people that I do 
not know very well, I have refused on these occasions precisely because I 
did not know the individuals to a degree sufficient to earn my trust, or was 
not in a private, controllable environment. I believe this is indicative of my 
good judgment in assessing the situation.  
 
(Item 4 at 1.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant also stated that she intended to stop using 
marijuana and would also “abstain from any and all drugs fitting the description given in 
Guideline H, paragraph 24, subparagraph(a)(1) & (2) of the Directive.” She also stated 
her willingness to sign a formal statement indicating her willingness to abstain from 
drugs. However, she did not provide such a statement with her answer. (Item 4 at 2.) 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant provided two documents. In one document, 
she reported that she had discussed her decision not to use marijuana or other illegal 
drugs with her sister. She stated that her sister supported her decision. In the second 
document, Applicant provided a notarized statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in 
the future. In her notarized statement, Applicant made clear her understanding that if 
she were granted a security clearance and then used illegal drugs, her security 
clearance would be immediately revoked. (Ex. A; Ex. B.)    
  
                             Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The record shows that Applicant admitted the illegal use of marijuana, with 
varying frequency, for approximately four years, from 2005 to at least December 2009. 
The record also establishes that Applicant, who is now 25 years old, used marijuana in 
her college years, during her graduate study, and after she began her professional 
 
6 
 
 
career. In 2007, as a young professional, she used ecstasy with her sister, the same 
person with whom she used marijuana. As recently as December 2009, she continued 
to use marijuana. She justified her illegal conduct by claiming it occurred only within her 
parents’ home with family members and close friends. When interviewed by an 
authorized investigator in April 2010, she indicated a willingness to continue her 
marijuana use. This conduct casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. It also raises security concerns about her ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined 
at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of her security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
Applicant claims her last use of marijuana was in December 2009, approximately 
one year ago. In April 2010, approximately nine months ago, Applicant told an OPM 
investigator of her intent to continue her marijuana use in the future. At that time, she 
said she would discontinue marijuana use if required to do so to keep a job or a security 
clearance. In response to the FORM, she provided a notarized statement of intent not 
to use illegal drugs in the future, and she affirmed her understanding that if she were to 
use illegal drugs in the future, her security clearance would be subject to revocation. 
 
Applicant’s relatively recent change of heart about her use of illegal drugs reflects 
positively on her. However, her defense of her drug use behavior focused on keeping it 
“private” and “occasional.” It is not clear from the record that she understands that using 
marijuana, even in her home with family members and close friends, was illegal 
conduct. Her decision to stop her use of illegal drugs appears to be motivated by her 
awareness that she likely would not be awarded a security clearance if she continued 
her drug use.  
 
In her December 3, 2010, response to the FORM, Applicant provided a notarized 
statement of her intent to stop using marijuana and all other illegal drugs. She 
acknowledged she could not dissociate from her primary drug-using companion, who 
was her sister and an immediate family member. She asserted, however, that she had 
discussed her decision to abstain from illegal drugs with her sister, and her sister 
supported her decision. She also provided a statement expressing her understanding 
 
7 
 
 
that if she were to use marijuana or any illegal drugs after being granted a security 
clearance, the clearance would be subject to immediate revocation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use is recent and occurred periodically over a period of 
four years. Her explanation of the circumstances of her illegal drug use casts doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Insufficient time has elapsed 
to demonstrate whether she will carry out her intent to abstain from illegal drug use in 
the future. I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b)(3) do not apply in mitigation to the 
facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Applicant provided documentation to comply with AG ¶¶ 26(b)(1), 26(b)(2), and 
26(b)(4). However, her decision to abstain from drugs is recent, and in April 2010, she 
claimed she “had no current plans to discontinue” her illegal drug use.  She has not yet 
credibly demonstrated that she will not abuse illegal drugs in the future. I conclude that 
AG ¶¶ 26(b)(1), 26(b)(2), and 26(b)(4) apply only partially in mitigation to security 
concerns raised by the facts of Applicant’s case.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. alleges that Applicant is disqualified, as a matter of law, from security 
clearance eligibility because of her illegal drug use and her statement to an authorized 
investigator that she intended to continue her illegal drug use. The relevant statute in 
this case is 50 U.S.C. § 435c, which provides, in pertinent part, as follows: “After 
January 1, 2008, the head of a Federal agency may not grant or renew a security 
clearance for a covered person who is an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an 
addict.” 
 
 50 U.S.C. § 435(a)(2) defines federal contractor employees as among those  
individuals covered by the prohibition articulated in  50 U.S.C. § 435c. Applicant is an 
employee of a federal contractor. The record evidence does not support a conclusion 
that she is an addict. However, there is ample record evidence to establish that 
Applicant was an unlawful user of a controlled substance for at least four years, from 
December 2005 until December 2009. Applicant asserted that she last used an illegal 
drug in December 2009, and she had no intention to use illegal drugs in the future.  
 
 50 U.S.C. § 435c prohibits the head of a Federal agency from granting or 
renewing a security clearance “for a covered person who is an unlawful user of a 
controlled substance. . . .” The statute’s use of the present tense is relevant. The plain 
meaning of the statute is that the prohibition applies to a current user of a controlled 
substance. In 2003 and 2005, DOHA’s Appeal Board concluded that a nearly identical 
predecessor statute reflected the intent of Congress to preclude current drug users from 
holding security clearances, but it did not intend that past drug users were forever 
barred from being granted security clearances. See ISCR Case No. 01-20314 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 29, 2003); ISCR Case No. 03-25009 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2005). 
 
 The record in this case does not establish that Applicant is a current user of 
illegal drugs. I conclude that 50 U.S.C. § 435c does not apply in this case.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances raised by the written record in this case. While Applicant 
was candid in revealing her drug abuse when she completed her e-QIP and when she 
was interviewed by an OPM investigator, she failed to credibly demonstrate that she 
would not return to drug use in the future. Moreover, she attempted to minimize the 
illegality and seriousness of her drug use by claiming that it occurred in her family home 
in the company of her sister and close friends. This raised concerns about her 
judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her relatively 
recent involvement with illegal drugs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                 Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:                        For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant  
 
9 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
            Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
