 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00346 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant’s answer was received by DOHA on August 20, 2010. She elected to 
have her case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 24, 2010. The FORM 
was mailed to Applicant and she received it on October 4, 2010. Applicant was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
On October 31, 2010, Applicant provided a one page response. The case was assigned 
to me on November 8, 2010.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling—Administrative Notice 
 
 Within the FORM, Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Lebanon. I have done so. The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as 
described in the FORM as attachments I through XVIII. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was born in the 
United States of a Lebanese father and mother. Her father owned a business in the 
United States at that time. Her family returned to Lebanon shortly after her birth where 
she was raised in a Christian neighborhood of Beirut. She attended private schools 
through high school and graduated from a university with an engineering degree in 
2001. In September 2001, she moved to the United States to purse her master’s and 
doctorate degrees in engineering. While in school, she met her future husband. He was 
born in Lebanon, but immigrated with his family to the United States in 1985. He 
became a naturalized United States citizen in about 1990. Applicant and her husband 
were married in 2006. They have a 14-month old son. Applicant’s husband is a 
physician and owns his own practice in the United States.1   
  
 Applicant admits that her mother, brother, and sisters are residents and citizens 
of Lebanon. She further explains that none of them have ever held political office or 
have been employed by the Lebanese government. Her mother is a homemaker who 
cares for Applicant’s elderly grandmother. Applicant sponsored her mother to receive 
permanent residence status in the United States, which she received in 2007. Her 
mother splits time between the United States and Lebanon. Applicant’s brother is a 
United States educated professor of biology employed by a private university in 
Lebanon. One of Applicant’s sisters is a homemaker and the other is a manager of a 
private business.2 
                                                          
1 Item 4, p. 7 of 21. 
 
2 Item 4, p. 8 of 21. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant also admits that her brothers-in-law, sister-in-law, and a friend are 
citizens and residents of Lebanon. None of them have ever held political office or are 
employed by the Lebanese government. One of her brother-in-laws is a bank director 
and the other is a private contractor. Her sister-in-law is a United States trained public 
administrator who works with an international development company headquartered in 
Washington, DC, but with an office in Beirut, Lebanon. Her friend is a graphic designer 
who works for a private university.3  
 
 Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen of Syria and a resident of Lebanon. 
Applicant’s grandmother is 85 years old and in poor health. She has resided in Lebanon 
for 25 years and has not been to Syria since 1985. She has no contact with any 
relatives in Syria. She has no affiliation with the Lebanese or Syrian governments.4  
 
 Applicant admits that she owns real estate investments and is the co-owner of an 
apartment in Lebanon. Both the investments and the apartment were acquired as an 
inheritance upon her father’s death. The value of the assets, $28,000 for the 
investments and $200,000 for the apartment, is insubstantial compared to Applicant’s 
United States assets. Applicant and her husband show an annual income of over 
$440,000 and have savings in excess of $600,000. Additionally, her husband’s medical 
practice is valued at $1.5 million and their home is assessed at over $750,000.5  
 
 Applicant’s travels to Lebanon were for family visits only. Since 2004, she used 
her United States passport to travel to Lebanon. She no longer has a Lebanese 
passport. She always stayed with family members during her visits.6 
 
 A character letter from Applicant’s supervisor attests that she is a trusted 
employee and highly regarded colleague. Her engineering background proved valuable 
in her projects supporting the United States Army and Navy. Her supervisor states she 
is loyal, reliable, and trustworthy. She is described as having “deep and growing roots in 
the United States and can be an important asset to her company and the U.S. 
government.” She is highly recommended for a security clearance. She also supplied a 
letter from her husband who described his family’s strong ties to the United States.7 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Id. 
 
4 Items 4, p. 9 of 21. 
 
5 Items 4, p. 9-10, 14-21 of 21. 
 
6 Items 4, p. 9 of 21. 
 
7 Items 4, p. 12-13 of 21. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Lebanon 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy in which people have the constitutional 
right to change their government. Due to civil war the exercise of political rights were 
precluded until 1992. Lebanon has a free-market economy and a strong laissez-faire 
commercial tradition. The economy is service-oriented. The United States enjoys a 
strong exporter position with Lebanon and is its fifth largest source of imported goods. 
More than 160 offices representing U.S. businesses operate in Lebanon. Since the 
lifting of passport restrictions in 1997, a number of large U.S. companies have opened 
branch or regional offices in Lebanon.  
 
The foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of 
its population, and its reliance on commerce and trade. Its foreign policy is heavily 
influenced by neighboring Syria, which has also long influenced Lebanon’s internal 
policies as well. Lebanon, like most Arab states, does not recognize Israel, with which it 
has been technically at war since Israel’s establishment.  
 
Lebanon has had some human-rights problems including the arbitrary arrest and 
detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, 
torture, and other abuses. 
 
The terrorist group Hezbollah is a Lebanese-based radical Shi’a group and is 
designated by the United States as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese 
government recognizes Hezbollah as a “legitimate resistance group” and political party 
and until recently was represented by elected officials in the Lebanese parliament. 
Hezbollah also provides support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations and is 
known to be involved in numerous anti-United States and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks. 
Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon.  
 
 The United States seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and 
to help preserve its independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. 
The United States provides more than $400 million in aid to Lebanon and pledged $1 
billion in additional aid. The aid reflects the importance the United States attaches to 
Lebanon’s development as a unified, independent and sovereign country. 
 
 U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently, there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
6 
 
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s mother, grandmother, brother, two sisters, two brothers-in-law, a 
sister-in-law, and a friend are residents of Lebanon. Applicant owes real estate 
investments and co-owns an apartment in Lebanon. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (e) have been 
raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant was born in the United States and, although she returned to Lebanon 
during her youth, she returned to the United States to obtain her master’s and doctorate 
degrees and has remained here ever since. She married a United States citizen who 
has a thriving medical practice. They also have a child who is a native born United 
States citizen. They are financially secure and have established well-grounded lives in 
this country. She traveled to Lebanon over the years solely to see family members. 
There was no evidence to suggest that any of her Lebanese relatives or her friend are 
influenced by the politics of Lebanon. Merely knowing people from other countries does 
not create a heightened risk. I find that Applicant has deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. Lebanon has some issues with human 
rights. Neither her relatives nor her friend have jobs or contacts with the Lebanese 
government. It is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interest of a relative and the United States. It is clear that even in 
the unlikely event such a situation would arise she would choose the interests of the 
United States Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, and 1.f. 
Applicant’s property interests in Lebanon are insignificant when contrasted to her 
income and assets in the United States. Even Department Counsel concedes in the 
FORM that this mitigating factor applies to SOR ¶¶1.d and 1.e. I find AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
8 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in the United 
States. She spent much of her youth in Lebanon. She returned to the United State, 
attended graduate school, and has remained here ever since. She married and started 
a family here. She is very well thought of by her current employer, where her 
engineering skills are highly valued.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Lebanon. Lebanon is a 
parliamentary republic which traditionally has maintained close ties with the United 
States. However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. 
“The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.”8 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the United States, and its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. Also important is whether the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. 
  
 Lebanon has human-rights issues and has been victimized by terrorism. The 
influence of Syria and the presence of Hezbollah in Lebanon is a concern. However, 
Applicant has proven that she supports United States military forces by working on 
projects where her engineering background has proven to be valuable assets. The 
Appeal Board has stated that “an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the 
U.S. is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline 
B case.”9 The Appeal Board case is distinguishable from Applicant’s case as it was 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
 
discussing an applicant who performed dangerous work as a translator in Afghanistan, 
which is not what Applicant has done. Nonetheless, Applicant’s work merits special 
consideration.  
 
Applicant’s life, career, substantial assets, and allegiance all lie in the United 
States. After considering all the evidence, including her valuable and highly regarded 
work for her current employer, I am convinced that this country is best served by 
granting Applicant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
9 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
