                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 10-03389 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is granted. 
  
On December 31, 2009, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance (Item 5). After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
On August 27, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Items 1, 2), that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
received the SOR on September 10, 2010. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 14, 2010, denying SOR 
allegation 1.a. and admitting allegation 1.b.2 She also requested a decision without a 
hearing. (Item 4) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case, in a file 
of relevant material (FORM) dated October 19, 2010.3 In addition to the documents 
already identified, the FORM contained Applicant's response to DOHA interrogatories 
(Items 6, 7), and two credit bureau reports. (Items 8, 9) Applicant was given 30 days 
from the date she received the FORM to file a response. On or about November 29, 
2010, Applicant requested an extension to gather documents from her lender. The 
request was granted and the deadline was extended to December 10, 2010. Applicant 
timely submitted a nine-page response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not 
object, and I admitted it as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on 
December 10, 2010, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s response to 
the FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 37 years old, is a high school graduate. She has been employed since 
December 2009 as a word processor. This is her first application for a security 
clearance. She married in 2000, and she and her husband have one seven-year-old 
child. In her security clearance application, Applicant listed continuous employment from 
1997 to the present, except for a four-month period in 2008. She has worked in 
restaurant service, sales, and administrative positions. (Item 5) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant and her husband took out loans and borrowed against their 
equity in their inherited home to purchase a bar. She stated that they had solid credit 
before buying the business, and her credit bureau reports show many accounts that are 
current. However, the bar eventually began to fail, and in 2009, they ceased operation. 
There is no evidence that they sought financial counseling. She and her husband now 
have full-time jobs. (Items 4, 8, 9) 
 
 Applicant listed several debts in her security clearance application, including a 
veterinary surgery bill for $2,961, past-due mortgage payments on her home, and a 
2  Applicant included documents with her Answer, which totals 41 pages. (Item 4) 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
) 
                                                          
foreclosure on a house that her husband inherited from his grandfather. As of May 
2010, Applicant’s balance on the loan against her husband’s inherited property was 
$66,000. Applicant submitted evidence of a cashier’s check in the amount of 
$11,562.25, paid on April 27, 2010, which brought their loan up-to-date. This loan is not 
alleged in the SOR. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she negotiated a settlement of 
her debt to her veterinarian (allegation 1.a.). She provided evidence that she paid 
$2,271 on July 27, 2010, and that the account is paid in full.4 The account number in 
her documentation matches that in the Government’s credit bureau reports. (Item 4 at p. 
4; Items 8, 9
 
 During her security interview in February 2010, Applicant informed the agent of 
three debts: the veterinary bill and two mortgage delinquencies—the inherited house 
and her primary residence). She stated that she and her husband missed their 
mortgage loan payments because they had no income for several months after the bar 
closed. At the time of the interview, she was negotiating with her mortgage lender for a 
modification of the mortgage for her primary residence (allegation 1.b.). In June, 2010, 
she paid $3,500 to a company that assists its clients in managing the loan modification 
process. She submitted a copy of her application and negotiation agreement. In July 
2010, her mortgage servicing company was evaluating her application, and informed 
her that although the foreclosure process would continue, her home would not be 
foreclosed while her application was under consideration. (Item 4 at p. 14 - 41; Items 5, 
7, 8, 9) 
 
 Applicant's mortgage company approved her application for a loan modification. 
In her response to the Government’s FORM, she provided a copy of the lender’s letter 
indicating that the modification was approved, and that her new payment of $1,124 
begins on February 1, 2011. Applicant's first payment will “halt the foreclosure process,” 
as long as she continues the payments. (AE A; Item 4) 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) of July 2010 shows a monthly net 
income, including her spouse’s net income, of $4,275. After expenses of $1,640, and a 
mortgage payment of $788 on the inherited house, her net monthly remainder is $1,847. 
(Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
4 The record is contradictory as to the settlement amount. Applicant indicates she paid a settlement of 
$591.74 (Item 4 at p. 11; Item 6), but the creditor states she paid $2,271 in its letter of September 21, 
2010. (Item 4 at p. 4) 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant owed two debts: a 
veterinarian bill and a delinquent mortgage. Applicant provided evidence that she paid 
one debt, but the larger debt to her mortgage lender remained $21,280 past due. The 
property was in foreclosure status as of January 2010, with a loan balance of $224,000. 
AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a 
death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent, as they were delinquent when the SOR was issued 
in 2010. However, they were not frequent, because she had only two debts that were 
delinquent. In addition, they resulted from a failed business, which is now closed. It is 
unlikely that Applicant will engage in a similar venture in the future, given its effect on 
her finances. Applicant's steps to resolve her debts reflect well on her current reliability. 
AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant borrowed from her equity in another property, and took out loans to 
finance a business in 2003. Opening a business was not beyond her control, but its 
failure was unforeseeable. When it failed, she was unable to meet her mortgage 
payments, and they became delinquent in 2009, when her business ceased operation. 
She reasonably decided to close the business in 2009. Since then she has been trying 
to recover financially. She and her husband now have full-time jobs. According to her 
credit bureau report of January 2010, her accounts are in good standing, but for the 
twodebts listed in the SOR. She sought to resolve her major delinquency, the mortgage 
on her primary residence, by hiring a company to assist her in obtaining a loan 
modification. Her efforts have been successful, and this month, she was notified that her 
 
6 
 
 
loan has been modified, and her payment reduced from $1,920 to $1,124. With a 
monthly net remainder of $1,847, she will be able to meet this lower payment. The 
modification has also halted the foreclosure process, as long as she makes the new 
payments. Applicant has paid the smaller SOR debt, and resolved the larger debt. AG 
¶¶ 20(b) and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties started when she and her husband purchased 
and operated a bar.  They ran the bar for several years, but eventually it began to fail, 
and they closed it in 2009. As she noted in her Answer, they obtained full-time jobs and 
started to repair their credit. The SOR alleges two debts. Applicant provided evidence 
that she paid one in July 2010. The larger debt related to foreclosure on her home. 
Applicant was in touch with the lender, and also hired a company that helped her apply 
for a loan modification that would bring her monthly payment within her means. She was 
recently informed that the modification was approved. Her new lower payment allows 
her to retain a monthly remainder of several hundred dollars. Given this experience, it is 
unlikely she will be in a similar situation in the future.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has satisfied the doubts about 
her ability and willingness to protect the Government’s interests.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.b.   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
