                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00967 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 3, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 18, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 25, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on November 8, 2010. Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant did not object and they were 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
admitted. Applicant testified on her own behalf and offered Exhibits (AE) A through H, 
which were admitted without objections. The record was held open until November 15, 
2010, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. She submitted one document. 
It was marked as AE I, was admitted without objection, and the record closed. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 15, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.a, which she 
denied. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old single mother of two children, ages 13 and 9. She 
served in the Army from 1995 to 2004, and was honorably discharged. She earned an 
associates degree in 2006. She is employed by a federal contractor.1  
 
 Applicant’s children have lived with her mother in a different state since 2002. 
Applicant only receives child support for one child. In the past, her mother received the 
child support directly. Applicant would send her mother approximately $900 a month to 
pay for childcare expenses and other child-related expenses, to care for her children. 
Her mother and her children moved in June 2010 and now reside with Applicant.2  
 
 Applicant stated she has been working two full-time jobs since 2007. In 2004, 
she was unemployed for one month. She explained the reason she has financial 
problems is because she has maintained two households with her children living with 
her mother. Her mother is now retired.3  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,151) was a state tax lien owed from 2006. Applicant 
lived in State A and worked in State B. She was paying taxes to State B, when she 
should have been paying them to State A. She paid $540 a month until the debt was 
completely paid in June 2010. State B reimbursed her for the taxes she paid.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,410) is for tuition owed to the university Applicant 
attended. The debt has been owed since 2006. She was contacted by the creditor in 
2007 about the debt but stated she could not afford to pay it. She made a $705 payment 
on November 10, 2010.5 
 
1 Tr. 19, 28, 59-63. 
 
2 Tr. 54-55. 
 
3 Tr. 27, 31, 74-76. 
 
4 Tr. 24, 33, 63-69; AE E. 
 
5 Tr. 28-31, 40-45, 69-70, 80; AE I, proof of November 10, 2010 payment. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶1.c ($11,828) was for a line of credit Applicant obtained 
sometime prior to 2004. She stopped making payments on the debt prior to being 
discharged from the Army. She provided a copy of a settlement offer from the creditor 
that expired on July 8, 2010, but did not provide any proof she accepted the offer or 
made any payments. She stated that she and the creditor agreed she would pay $500 a 
month. She stated she has made five $500 payments on the debt, but did not provide 
documented proof of her payments or a copy of the agreement.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶1.d ($13,060) is for a repossessed vehicle Applicant 
purchased while she was in the Army. She stopped making payments on the debt in 
2003. She was aware the vehicle was sold and the balance is the amount owed on the 
deficiency. She did not contact the creditor until October 2010. She has not made any 
arrangements to pay the debt.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($70) is to a collection company. There is confusion about 
the debt. Applicant contacted the creditor and was advised the balance was now $187. 
She provided proof that she paid the debt on August 3, 2010. Applicant stated she 
thought it was the debt alleged because the amount owed was the same. It is unclear if 
Applicant resolved the debt listed in the SOR or a different debt. She did not provide 
supporting documentation that the debt she paid is the same as the one alleged in the 
SOR.8  
 
 Applicant stated that in 2009 she was attempting to purchase a house and 
obtained a copy of her credit report. She used $4,000 for a down payment. The 
purchase did not go through and the money was returned to her. In her interview with 
an Office of Personnel Management investigator, Applicant stated that she did not make 
efforts to repay certain debts because she was trying to purchase a house and was 
using her money for that effort. She stated she did not receive financial counseling 
when she was in the Army. She has tried to curb her expenses and hopes now that she 
and her family reside together she will have more expendable income. She has 
approximately $2,000 in savings and no money in her checking account. She believes 
she owes about $5,000 on the balances of her credit cards. They are not delinquent. 
Applicant did not have an explanation for why she has not paid her past-due debts, 
other than she was sending her mother money to care for her children and saving for a 
house. Based on her personal financial statement she provided with her interrogatories, 
she has approximately $2,000 remaining each month after paying her expenses. She 
stated at her hearing that she did not realize she had that much expendable income, 
and does not have that amount at the end of the month.9  
 
6 Tr. 26-27, 34-40, 70; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. 45-47, 70. 
 
8 Tr. 24-25, 47-52; AE F. 
 
9 Tr. 53-58; 70-73, 77-80; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant provided a copy of a contract for a debt consolidation program, but did 
not provide any evidence that she has accepted the terms of the program and is 
participating in it. She stated the credit counseling service provided her tips on reducing 
her debt and building a savings account. She also provided a copy of a budget.10  
 
 Applicant provided character letters that I have considered. A manager who has 
worked with her for four years considers her extremely professional and a highly 
effective team member. She has a positive impact on team morale. She is considered 
extremely responsible and takes holding a clearance very seriously. He considers her 
very trustworthy and focused. Another coworker for whom Applicant has worked for and 
with describes her as smart, hardworking, reliable, and kind. She has received awards 
for her performance, and she is willing to go above and beyond what she was hired to 
do. She is dependable and considered an invaluable component of the team. Another 
coworker describes her as extremely dedicated to her work and family. She is well 
organized, efficient, and competent. She works well under pressure and quickly adapts 
to new technologies. She is a key player to the organization.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
10 Tr. 25-26; AE A, H. 
 
11 AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has approximately $26,000 in delinquent debts that are unpaid or 
unresolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that are many years old that she has not paid or 
resolved. She made no attempt to address most of the debts until her security clearance 
became an issue. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are numerous, ongoing, and not the result of circumstances making 
them unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant is a single mother and her children lived with their grandmother. 
Applicant sent her mother money to care for her children. This situation was beyond 
Applicant’s control. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. To be fully applicable Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. She did not. Applicant had old 
delinquent debts that she ignored for many years. Her personal financial statement 
showed she had excess income after paying her expenses, but she did not use it to 
repay her debts, but rather she saved it to purchase a house. She did not act fiscally 
responsible. Applicant has resolved the tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.a and paid another small 
debt, but it is unclear if it is the one alleged in the SOR. Applicant provided a copy of a 
contract for a debt consolidation plan, but did not provide any substantiation that she is 
participating in it. She stated she received financial counseling from the debt 
consolidation company. She provided a budget. She has not provided proof that she is 
making consistent good-faith payments on any of the remaining delinquent debts. 
Therefore, I find that although she has received financial counseling, there are not clear 
indications the problem is being resolved and is under control. Perhaps now that 
Applicant’s family is in one household she will be able to manage her finances and 
decrease her delinquent debts. However, at this juncture, it is too early to conclude that 
she is acting responsibly toward resolving her delinquent debts. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has a 
good work record and is praised by her mangers and coworkers. She served in the 
Army and was honorably discharged. She is a single mother and her children lived with 
their grandmother until they recently consolidated their households. Applicant has 
worked two jobs since 2007 and had excess income to resolve her delinquent debts, but 
she did not. Her delinquent debts are several years old and she has taken very little 
action in the past to address them. She saved money to purchase a house instead of 
paying her past debts. She did not purchase a house, but also has not paid her 
delinquent debts. She owes approximately $26,000. Applicant did not provide a clear 
plan on how she intends to resolve her debts. Applicant failed to meet her burden of 
persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
