                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-00893 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 19, 2009, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On March 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 7, 2010. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 8, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 21, 2010, and I received 
the case assignment on April 28, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 29, 
2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 27, 2010. The Government 
offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
and submitted Exhibit A, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 8, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 34 years old and married. He married his current wife seven years 
ago. His first marriage ended in divorce.  He has two sons. Applicant has four years of 
military service in the U.S. Air Force, from 1995 to 1999. He started working for a 
defense contractor in August 2009. He was laid off work in January 2010 because he 
lacked a security clearance. He was unemployed at the time of the hearing and 
receiving unemployment compensation. Applicant had a top secret security clearance in 
the Air Force. (Tr. 13-19, 31, 35, 63; Exhibit 1) 
 
His civilian employment history shows about six months of unemployment 
between December 1999 and January 2010. After leaving active duty in 1999, Applicant 
worked for one employer for seven months in 2000. Then he obtained employment that 
lasted seven years, from 2000 to 2007. In April 2007 he obtained employment with a 
third company. He was laid off from that job at some unspecified time, with a month of 
unemployment, and then was employed at a fourth company before obtaining his 
position in August 2009 with his current employer. (Tr. 13-19, 31, 35, 63; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant has 16 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $294,685. If the 
mortgage debts listed in SOR Paragraphs 1.n and 1.o are duplicates, subtracting the 
$141,000 in Paragraph 1.n results in a debt total of $153,685. (Tr. 34-44, 64, 65; 
Exhibits 1-4) 
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002 after his divorce. His former wife 
incurred credit card debt. Applicant assumed his wife was paying the bills regularly, but 
she was not doing so. The Chapter 13 filing was suggested by a financial advisor 
because Applicant wanted to purchase a house with his girlfriend, who became his 
second wife. His payments were $150 monthly to the trustee. This bankruptcy was 
discharged in March 2005. (Tr. 20-23; Exhibits 1-4)  
 
Applicant married his second wife in April 2003. They purchased a home after 
completing Applicant’s first bankruptcy in 2005. The purchase price of the house was 
$120,000. They made a down payment of $1,800 on that house. The original loan 
amount was $128,000. He lost his job in January 2007 and became delinquent on his 
mortgage because of the loss of income. He was unemployed until April 2007. Applicant 
stated his mortgage payments on the adjustable rate mortgage kept increasing after he 
made the first late payment in 2007. The payments went from $800 to $1,600 monthly. 
A judgment for $127,861.00 was obtained by the mortgage lender against Applicant on 
 
3 
 
 
his home loan. The mortgage was sold to another company and the SOR (Paragraph 
1.n) alleges the debt is $141,150 with a past due amount of $25,350. Applicant 
contends the debts in SOR Paragraphs 1.n and 1.o are the same debt. He sold a 
motorcycle and other possessions to try to salvage the mortgage. He used his Section 
401K retirement savings of $10,000 to try to save his house. Applicant asserts he paid 
the mortgage lender about $24,000 but to no avail. The lender repossessed the house 
and Applicant moved out of the house in November 2007. Applicant does not remember 
if the mortgage payment adjustments were made monthly or quarterly. He tried to 
arrange a short sale of the home, but the lender would not approve it. Applicant has no 
documentation to show any of his debt payments in the past four years or his attempts 
to save his former home.  (Tr. 22-34, 43, 48, 56, 57, 60, 78; Exhibits 1-4) 
 
Applicant filed a second Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2010. The total 
liabilities listed in that petition are $228,233.89. These debts include the SOR debts and 
other unpaid financial obligations, including numerous medical and credit card debts, in 
addition to his auto repossession in 2007 of a used car purchased in 2004. There is a 
$6,200 judgment debt owed to a person for whom Applicant did woodworking in 2006. 
They had a dispute over payment terms and he was sued. Applicant admitted he has 
not paid the eight debts listed in the SOR that are under $500 each. Applicant will pay 
$175 monthly to the bankruptcy trustee for five years. The total amount of money he will 
pay to satisfy his debts under this Chapter 13 bankruptcy is $10,500. (Tr. 34-44, 63-65; 
Exhibits 1-4)  
 
Applicant has less than $100 in his checking account and nothing in his savings 
account. He has no credit cards, using money orders to pay his monthly debts. 
Applicant has one car that he and his wife drive. (Tr. 35, 63, 64) 
 
Applicant submitted one character reference letter. The author has known 
Applicant since August 2009. He stated his opinion that Applicant is “of sound character 
and integrity and recommend he be granted a security clearance.” (Tr. 11; Exhibit A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated at least $153,685 in delinquent debt from 2004 to the 
present time that remains unpaid.  Applicant has 16 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. 
The Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition Applicant filed in January 2010 shows $228,233.89 
of debt included in that action. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One condition may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant filed two Chapter 13 wage earner plans in the past eight years to 
resolve his delinquent debts. The current Chapter 13 allows him over the next five years 
to pay $10,500 to resolve his $228,233.89 in liabilities. The bankruptcy debts include 
the 16 debts listed in the SOR. Applicant spent $24,000 in 2007 trying to save his home 
after he made late mortgage payments in 2007. He was unemployed from January 2007 
to April 2007. But he has not been unemployed more than six months for the past 
 
6 
 
 
decade. Therefore, Applicant had the income to pay his debts. Yet he accumulated a 
large number and amount of delinquent debts as shown on his bankruptcy petition.  
 
Moreover, instead of paying other debts and seeking professional legal 
assistance to resolve his mortgage problem, Applicant concentrated all his money and 
efforts on attempting to rehabilitate his mortgage debt. His testimony was that the 
mortgage lender was not willing to credit his $24,000 to the arrearages. At some point in 
2007 it should have been obvious to Applicant that his efforts were fruitless and he 
should have cut his losses by selling the house. Also, Applicant has not paid the eight 
debts listed in the SOR that are under $500 each, which steps would demonstrate a 
good-faith efforts to resolve his delinquent debts, but for his mortgage judgment. Nor did 
Applicant have any documents to show his payments and efforts to rehabilitate his 
mortgage. AG ¶ 20 (d) might apply if Applicant made more common-sense good-faith 
efforts to repay his delinquent debts instead of filing another Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant engaged in a pattern of 
spending that resulted in a large number and amount of delinquent debts. He did this 
while employed during the past decade. He demonstrated a pattern of irresponsible 
financial behavior. His conduct is frequent and recent because he continues to owe the 
money. Applicant has not shown any rehabilitation or permanent behavioral changes. 
The likelihood exists that Applicant will continue to spend beyond his based on his past 
performance. Finally, the potential for coercion, pressure, exploitation, or duress exists 
because of the magnitude of the debts and the pattern exhibited of spending and 
irresponsible financial judgment by the Applicant.  
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.r:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
