 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA.  
Exemption 6 applies. 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 10-02271   
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant in Personal Appearance                 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for drug involvement. Accordingly, Applicant's request for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) signed on October 19, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA. 
Exemption 6 applies. 
 
2
                                                
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 On August 3, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on August 12, 
2010, in which he admitted both allegations. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 31, 
2010, and the case was assigned to me on September 1, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on September 3, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 
20, 2010. I admitted two exhibits offered by the Government (GE 1-2). Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and offered on exhibit, which I admitted as Applicant's Exhibit 
(AE) A. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. On 
September 27, 2010, he forwarded a document. Department Counsel did not object. I 
admit the document as AE B. Department Counsel’s comment on AE B is admitted as 
Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript on September 27, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings. 
 
Applicant is 28 years old and single. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 
political science in 2007, with a minor in Arabic. While working on his college degree, 
Applicant attended schools in four different states: state A (2003); state B (2004-2007); 
state C (January to December 2006); and state D (May to July 2006), and in Syria 
(November to December 2008). He studied Arabic in Syria for two months. He has 
worked for a federal contractor as a media research analyst since 2009. In 2008 and 
2009, he traveled in Eastern Europe and Turkey. (GE 1; Tr. 16-17, 49) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he smoked marijuana about monthly 
between the ages of 16 and 19. He dropped out of high school, and for a time, he was 
homeless. He completed his GED through a Job Corps program. The time that he spent 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented by the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA.  
Exemption 6 applies. 
3
                                                
in high school and in Job Corps is the primary time when he used marijuana. He then 
spent two years in AmeriCorps.3 He worked with a number of mentors, and when he 
completed AmeriCorps in 2002, he realized that he should attend college. As he 
became more serious about his goals, his marijuana use decreased to a few times 
during college. (Tr. 52-56) 
 
 On his security clearance application, he admitted to using marijuana twice in 
the previous seven years: in New Orleans in April 2006 and in Prague in January 2009. 
In New Orleans, he shared a marijuana joint with a friend. (Tr. 27) In Prague, Applicant 
took two puffs from a marijuana joint provided by youths he met at a hostel. (GE 1; Tr. 
21-27, 31) 
 
During his security interview, Applicant disclosed to the security investigator that 
he also smoked marijuana in his apartment in the United States in January 2009.4 (GE 
2) A friend had obtained marijuana, and Applicant agreed to share it. They smoked 
something less than one “dime bag” in Applicant's apartment.5 Applicant also told the 
security investigator that he does not smoke marijuana habitually, but did not rule out 
the possibility of using marijuana in the future at social, recreational, or special events.6 
(GE 2; Tr. 28-31) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he also smoked marijuana at his home in 
about May 2010.7 He was going through a stressful period and was not able to sleep. 
Since marijuana use made him tired, he decided to use it to combat his insomnia. He 
purchased a “dime bag” and made two joints from it. He smoked a joint. Later in the 
summer, he discarded the remaining marijuana. He stated at the hearing that smoking 
 
3 AmeriCorps is defined on its website as an organization in which volunteers work for one year to 
combat poverty in low-income communities in the United States. See http://www.americorps.gov/  
 
4 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not remember the date he used marijuana with his friend 
at his apartment in the United States. Only one January 2009 use is alleged in the SOR; it is unclear 
from the record whether that use is the use in Prague, or the use in Applicant's apartment in the United 
States. It is clear, however, that one January 2009 use, and the May 2010 use, are unalleged. Those 
two uses will be considered only as part of the whole-person analysis. (Tr. 29) See App. Bd. Case No. 
03-20327 at 4 (Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
5 He testified that his friend agrees that he gave Applicant marijuana, but denies smoking it with 
Applicant in Applicant's apartment. (Tr. 30-31) 
 
6 Applicant affirmed this information, which appears in the summary of the security interview, when he 
responded to the DOHA interrogatory. (GE 2)  
 
7 This use occurred after Applicant had submitted his security clearance application.  
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA. 
Exemption 6 applies. 
 
4
                                                
marijuana “despite everything [he] was going through” with the security clearance 
process was a “stupid decision.” (Tr. 32-34) 
 
Applicant has not used any other illegal drugs. Department Counsel asked 
Applicant about his statement to the investigator that he might use marijuana in the 
future. Applicant testified that he responded to the question as if it were a college 
hypothetical, i.e., that it could happen, just as anything could happen. He did not realize 
the investigator was asking about his intent to smoke marijuana. When asked at the 
hearing about his intent, he testified, (GE 2; Tr. 38-44) 
 
I regret over -- I can't say how much I regret using it.  Just -- I mean, it's -- 
it -- just as early as this year, I've used marijuana.  And I -- I can't make 
any excuses for it.  But when I say I intend not to use it, I -- I mean it.  
 
Applicant submitted a signed Statement of Intent declaring that he intends never to use 
illegal drugs in the future, and to abstain for “legal and health reasons” and for 
advancement in his career. Applicant did not submit character references. (AE B) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).8 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest9 for an applicant to either receive or 
 
8 Directive. 6.3. 
9 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA.  
Exemption 6 applies. 
5
                                                
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.10 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.11 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 The security concern about drug involvement is that 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. AG 
¶ 24. 
 
 The record evidence raises two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug 
abuse), and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). 
Applicant both possessed and used an illegal drug in 2006 and 2009. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 
(c) apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA. 
Exemption 6 applies. 
 
6
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana in 2006 was not recent, but his use in 2009, last 
year, is recent. It was not infrequent, as Applicant used marijuana about monthly for at 
least three years when he was in his teens, and then returned to marijuana use in 2006 
and 2009. In addition, he used it, not in unusual circumstances, but in the common 
situation where he shared it with friends. His decision to use illegal drugs raises serious 
doubts about his judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant testified that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future, and 
submitted a statement to that effect. AG ¶ 26(b)(4) applies. However, in light of his 
recent use of marijuana, he has not demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence. 
The partial mitigation offered by Applicant's statement of intent does not overcome 
Applicant’s recent use.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA.  
Exemption 6 applies. 
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has demonstrated remarkable character and resilience in overcoming 
homelessness and an initial lack of education. He provided volunteer service to the 
United States. He has responded to the guidance of mentors, earned a GED, attended 
community college, and then a four-year college, obtained a degree in political science, 
and traveled in many parts of the world. He wishes to use his education to work for the 
U.S. government. All of these positive facets of Applicant's character and 
accomplishments history weigh in his favor: 
 
 At the time Applicant first used marijuana, he was a teenager. This use is not 
recent, and he was less mature than he is now. He is remorseful for his use of 
marijuana. He has stated his intent to avoid using illegal drugs in the future. He was 
candid in his security clearance application and tried to be exact about the facts 
presented in his testimony. 
 
 However, Applicant's recent use of marijuana presents a security concern. He is 
an intelligent man and knew that marijuana use was illegal. Nevertheless, he used 
marijuana twice in 2009—once in Prague, and once with a friend in his apartment. And 
he then used it again in May 2010. His 2010 use is especially troubling: At that time, he 
was on notice that illegal drug use was an issue for security clearance holders because 
he had completed a security clearance application in October 2009 that asked about 
illegal drug use; and he had met with an investigator in January 2010 who specifically 
asked him about his illegal drug use, and whether or not he intended to use marijuana 
in the future. After this interview, Applicant used marijuana. He engaged in criminal 
conduct, despite the fact that he was on notice that use of illegal drugs was security-
relevant and he was being considered for a security clearance. He placed his own 
desires above those of the Government. Applicant's actions failed to demonstrate the 
good judgment and trustworthiness required in those who are granted access to 
classified information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
When unredacted this document contains information 
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA. 
Exemption 6 applies. 
 
8
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
