 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00641 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on September 10, 2009. On July 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 2, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) and provided the FORM to Applicant on September 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
20, 2010. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6. By letter 
dated September 20, 2010, DOHA provided a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the FORM on September 28, 2010. His response was due 
on October 28, 2010. He did not submit any information or raise any objections within 
the required time period. On December 15, 2010, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b(1), 1(b)(2), and 1(c).). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all Guideline C allegations. His admissions are admitted as 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old, married, and employed as a manager by a government 
contractor. His work involves extensive travel outside of the United States to develop 
business opportunities for his employer. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
  Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Mexico. In 1977, he received a 
bachelor’s degree from a Mexican university. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1995. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 1; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant’s father, who is deceased, was a citizen and resident of Mexico. His 
mother, two brothers, and five sisters are residents and citizens of Mexico. Applicant 
travels to Mexico to visit his family members about six times a year. He speaks on the 
telephone with his mother in Mexico two or three times a week. He communicates with 
his siblings by e-mail and by telephone about two times a month. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant holds a U.S. passport, which he acquired in 2005. Since becoming a 
U.S. citizen, he has not held an active Mexican passport. Since 2000, he claims dual 
citizenship with Mexico. He asserts that his Mexican citizenship is passive and based on 
his birth in Mexico to parents who were citizens of Mexico. He also stated that when he 
became a U.S. citizen, he renounced his Mexican citizenship. (Item 1; Item 5 at 3-4.) 
 
 On November 11, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM).1 Applicant told the investigator 
that he claimed dual citizenship with Mexico in 2000 because he intended to acquire 
property in Mexico at a future date. Sometime between 2001 and 2004, Applicant 
 
1 On April 7, 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a statement affirming that he 
had read the summary of the interview, and, with the exception of the spelling of one sister’s first name, 
found it to be true and correct. He corrected the spelling of his sister’s name but made no other changes, 
corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s summary. (Item 5 at 6-7.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
opened a bank account in Mexico and purchased real property in Mexico.2 (Item 1; Item 
5.)  
 
 Applicant told the OPM investigator that he was having a home built in Mexico as 
an investment or retirement home. He estimated the value of the property at $300,000. 
He estimated the value of his Mexican bank account at $1,500. He has authorized his 
sister, a citizen and resident of Mexico, to act on his behalf and disburse funds from the 
account, as needed, for building the house. (Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant estimated that the house would be completely finished in 2009 or 2010. 
His mother was living in the home in November 2009. Applicant stated that his mother 
would reside in the home until he retired or sold the property. (Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that his main purpose for exercising dual 
citizenship with Mexico was to protect his property investment in Mexico. He does not 
want to lose his property if Mexican laws change in the future. (Item 5 at 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant asserted he would have no problem in renouncing his Mexican 
citizenship if he did not have a real estate investment in Mexico. He told the investigator 
that if he were required to renounce his Mexican citizenship, he would have to find 
another way to protect his property. (Item 5 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he does not exercise any other rights of his Mexican 
citizenship. He has not served in the Mexican military, and he has no non-military 
service with the Mexican government. He has not voted in elections in Mexico. He has 
not taken part in political activities in Mexico, and he has no contact with the Mexican 
government. (Item 5 at 3-4.) 
       
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
2 In response to questions in Section 20, Foreign Activities, on his e-QIP, Applicant stated that he 
purchased real property in Mexico in September 2001. In his personal subject interview, however, he 
advised the OPM investigator that he purchased land in 2003 or 2004 and intended to build a home on 
the property. At about the same time, he opened a bank account in Mexico to facilitate money 
transactions associated with building the house. (Item 1 at 33; Item 5 at 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant renounced his Mexican citizenship when he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1995. In 2000, however, Applicant claimed dual citizenship with Mexico 
 
6 
 
 
because he intended to purchase real property in Mexico. He then purchased real 
estate and opened a bank account in Mexico. He estimated the value of his Mexican 
bank account at $1,500 and the value of his real property in Mexico at $300,000. 
Applicant holds dual citizenship with Mexico to protect his property interests in Mexico. 
Asserting dual citizenship with Mexico after becoming a U.S. citizen raises a concern 
that Applicant actively exercises dual citizenship with Mexico. I conclude that Applicant’s 
conduct raises potentially disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶10(a)(5) and 
¶10(b).  
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign 
passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport 
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” 
 
Applicant claimed dual citizenship with Mexico as an adult after renouncing his 
Mexican citizenship and after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. His dual citizenship 
with Mexico was not based solely on his parents’ Mexican citizenship or on his own birth 
in Mexico. Instead, as a U.S. citizen, he actively exercised Mexican citizenship to 
acquire legal benefits that would protect his property interests in Mexico. His willingness 
to renounce his Mexican citizenship for a second time was conditioned upon finding a 
suitable alternative to protecting his Mexican property interests, which he valued at 
$300,000. A conditional offer of renunciation is entitled to less weight in mitigation than 
is an unconditional offer. See ISCR Case No. 01-16098 (App. Bd. May 29, 2003.). 
 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record. He did not file a response 
to the FORM. Without an opportunity to assess Applicant’s credibility at a hearing, I am 
unable to conclude that he met his burden of persuasion in mitigation under the Foreign 
Preference mitigating condition 11(b). See ISCR Case No. 07-14151 (Sep. 10, 2008.) 
The written record in this case demonstrates Applicant’s preference for foreign 
citizenship and property interests over the interests of the United States. His concern for 
protecting his Mexican property interests could increase his potential to be subject to 
foreign coercion or pressure. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 11(a) and 11(c) also do 
not apply in mitigation in this case. AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e) do not apply to the facts in 
this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and well-
educated professional with a specialty in management and business development. After 
renouncing his Mexican citizenship and becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, he claimed 
dual citizenship with Mexico to acquire and then protect financial and property interests 
in Mexico. Applicant was willing to renounce his dual citizenship with Mexico only if a 
suitable alternative for protecting his Mexican property interests could be found. 
Applicant’s active preference for his Mexican citizenship raises security concerns that 
are not mitigated by the record in this case.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:              Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b(1) – 1.b(2):     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
