 
1 
 
 
                                                           
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-01372 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 13, 2009. On 
June 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 22, 2010; answered it on July 6, 2010; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
 
2 
 
 
9, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 20, 1020, and the case 
was assigned to me on August 25, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
September 2, 2010, scheduling it for September 22, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified but presented no witnesses or documentary evidence. I 
kept the record open until October 8, 2010, to enable her to submit documentary 
evidence. She timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A through D 
are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 30, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.h. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from 
college in May 2005 with a bachelor’s degree in economics. She is single and has a 
four-year-old daughter, born in November 2005. She did not look for work after 
graduating from college, because she was pregnant and decided to live with her mother 
and give her mother emotional support after her brother’s death. (Tr. 25-27.)  
 
Applicant worked as a tax preparer from January to April 2006, and then she was 
unemployed until April 2007, when she began an apprenticeship with her current 
employer. Her apprenticeship evaluation for the period ending on August 31, 2010, 
rated her as “excellent,” but commented that “she needs to understand that her 
unattended times should remain focused on [her employer’s] functions.” (AX B.) She 
has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant admitted 10 of the 11 delinquent debts alleged, totaling about $63,336 
and including $53,568 in student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g). Her other delinquent debts are 
a delinquent telephone bill for $463 (SOR ¶ 1.a), a delinquent credit card account for 
$7,324 (SOR ¶ 1.c), an unsatisfied $710 judgment for unpaid rent (SOR ¶ 1.h), and four 
medical bills for $335, $431, $320, and $185 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k). Her 
admissions are corroborated by her credit reports dated April 3, 2010, and October 3, 
2009. (GX 4 and 5.)  
 
Applicant denied the judgment for unpaid rent. She testified at the hearing that 
she paid it, but she did not produce any documentation to support her testimony. (Tr. 
22.) 
 
 Applicant contacted the credit card debtor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and was offered 
a settlement for less than half of the balance due, but she rejected it, thinking it was a 
scam. She has not contacted any of her other creditors (Tr. 32-33.) She has not sought 
financial counseling. (Tr. 40.) 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2009, Applicant told a security investigator that she became 
overwhelmed with her debts and stopped paying them until she could decide what to 
do. She told the investigator she intended to contact her creditors within 60 days to set 
up repayment plans. (GX 3 at 5.) She had no payment plans in place as of the date of 
the hearing.  
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in March 2010, reflecting 
gross annual income of about $44,000, and net monthly income of about $2,380, 
including $180 in child support. Her monthly living expenses are about $2,810, and she 
pays $420 per month on her car loan, leaving her a monthly shortfall of about $850. (GX 
2 at 3.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that the father of her daughter had stopped 
paying child support, thereby increasing her monthly shortfall to about $1,030. (Tr. 24, 
43.) After the hearing, she produced a copy of a show-cause order directed to the 
child’s father. (AX C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her credit reports, establish all the 
allegations except SOR ¶ 1.h. She denied the judgment for unpaid rent alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.h, but she submitted no documentary evidence to refute the credit reports. Her 
financial history establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). Thus, the burden shifted to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are ongoing, numerous, and did 
not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant encountered some 
circumstances beyond her control. The father of her child stopped paying child support 
and she was unable to find employment. On the other hand, she voluntarily chose to 
live with her mother after graduating from college instead of seeking employment. 
Furthermore, she has not acted responsibly, because she has done virtually nothing to 
resolve her debts even though she has been employed since April 2007. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought financial 
counseling.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has made virtually no 
effort to resolve her delinquent debts. She claimed that she paid the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h, but she presented no documentation to support her claim.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts, except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, and she has presented no 
documentation to support her dispute. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a well-educated, intelligent young woman. She was candid and 
sincere at the hearing. In spite of a college degree in economics, she appears to have 
no concept of financial management. Her reaction to her financial problems has been 
passive. She has no plan for achieving financial stability. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
