 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-01231 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2010, and DOHA received her 
response on July 12, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 31, 
 
2 
 
 
2010. The case was previously assigned to another administrative judge on August 6, 
2010, and reassigned to me on September 8, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on August 26, 2010, scheduling the hearing for September 15, 2010. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were received without objection, and she testified on her own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 24, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to Israel contained in Ex. I. Without objection from the 
Applicant, I took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department 
Counsel, which pertain to Israel. (Tr. 13-14.) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known 
or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts 
pertaining to Israel were derived from Ex. I as indicated under subheading “Israel” of 
this decision. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her answers are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old materials manager, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2009. She seeks a secret security clearance, which is a 
condition of her continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 16-17, 19-20.) Applicant is a U.S.-
born citizen. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant graduated from a prestigious university with a Bachelor of Arts 
Degree with honors in economics and planning in January 1997. She later attended 
 
3 
 
 
graduate school and was awarded a Master of Business Administration in August 
2006. (GE 1, AE D, Tr. 17-18.) Applicant was initially introduced to her husband, who 
had come to the United States from Israel in “about 2000,” to visit his family members. 
Applicant and her husband later married in August 2000 at a ceremony that took place 
in the United States. Her husband is an Israeli-born citizen. She and her husband 
have two U.S.-born daughters, ages five and two. (GE 1, AE A, Tr. 20, 22-23.)  
 
Before moving to the United States, Applicant’s husband had completed his 
mandatory military service in the Israeli Army. Her husband has a pending application 
to become a U.S. citizen. He has complied with all requirements to become a U.S. 
citizen and is awaiting further instructions from the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services. (AE A, Tr. 22-24, 66.) Applicant’s husband is co-owner of a business in the 
United States that reviews workmen’s compensation cases and analyzes premiums. 
He does not have any ties to the Israeli military or government. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
Not alleged is the fact that Applicant was a dual citizen of the United States and 
Israel by virtue of her mother being an Israeli citizen. As a child, Applicant’s mother 
obtained an Israeli passport for her. Her Israeli passport has since expired and 
Applicant renounced her Israeli citizenship. Her renunciation became effective on 
December 9, 2009. The only passport Applicant holds is a U.S. passport, which she 
renewed in July 2008. (GE 2 
 
Applicant’s mother was born in Israel, is 62 years old, and is a dual citizen of 
Israel and the United States. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s 
father is 62 years old and is a U.S.-born citizen. Both of Applicant’s parents reside in 
the United States. Her mother is a social worker and her father is a dentist. In addition 
to her parents residing in the United States, Applicant has two brothers, ages 30 and 
25. Both brothers are U.S. citizens and reside in the United States. (GE 1, Tr. 27-30.) 
Her 30-year-old brother is unmarried and is currently studying sign language. Her 25-
year-old brother is married and is a dentist. His wife is also a dentist. (Tr. 32-33, 57-
59.) 
 
Applicant describes her relationship with her parents as close, especially with 
her mother. Her parents are divorced. Applicant also maintains a “very close” 
relationship with her two brothers and the spouse of her married brother. Applicant 
lives near her immediate family members and maintains frequent contact with them. 
(Tr. 56-59.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, age 60, and her father-in-law, age 58, are Israeli-
born citizens and residents. Applicant’s father-in-law works for a private company that 
uses computers and statistics to gather demographic information. Her mother-in-law is 
a day care teacher. Applicant maintains monthly contact with her in-laws by e-mail or 
telephone. They do not have any ties to the Israeli military or government. (GE 1, GE 
2, Tr. 33-37.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Additionally, Applicant has a sister-in-law, age 31, and a brother-in-law, 
approximately age 30, who are residents and citizens of Israel. Her brother-in-law 
works for a private computer company. He is married and his wife also works for a 
private computer company. Applicant’s sister-in-law is a teacher. She is married and 
her husband is serving in the Israeli Army. They have two young children. Applicant 
maintains contact with her brother and sister-in-law “once every three or four months, 
not very often.” Apart from her sister-in-law’s husband, Applicant is unaware of any 
ties that her in-laws may have to the Israeli military or government. (GE 2, 36-42.) 
 
Lastly, Applicant has two distant female U.S. citizen cousins residing in Israel. 
They are her “grandmother’s brother’s child and child’s child.” One cousin is a retired 
receptionist in her “60’s,” who worked in a health center. The other cousin is a mother 
in her “early 50’s” and works in the home. Applicant maintains contact with her distant 
cousins “once every couple of months, in the holidays.” Neither cousin has any ties to 
the Israeli military or government. (GE 2, AE A, Tr. 43-46.) 
 
Applicant traveled to Israel in August 2000, May 2006, September 2008, and 
June 2010 to visit family. When she traveled to Israel in June 2010, she used her U.S. 
passport. As noted supra, she no longer is an Israeli citizen and is no longer eligible to 
hold an Israeli passport. Applicant and her husband do not provide any financial 
support to any family members in Israel. (GE 1, AE A, Tr. 48-50.) 
 
Applicant spends her discretionary free time with her family, working out in the 
gym, and attending events at their local community center. (Tr. 46-48, 64-65.) All of 
the assets that Applicant and her husband own, to include their real and personal 
property, and bank accounts such as checking and savings accounts and college 
funds for their children, are U.S.-based. This is in contrast to having no assets in 
Israel. (AE C, Tr. 59-64, 66.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted three reference letters: (1) a letter from her materials 
manager, who described her as “a very conscientious worker who is honest and leads 
with integrity,” and “consistently demonstrates the highest level of ethical integrity;” (2) 
a letter from her former “mentor” and supervisor, who described her as “capable and 
reliable, and therefore [he has] no reservations in recommending her for any position;” 
and (3) a letter from a former neighbor, who has known Applicant since she was a 
child, and said, “I often entrusted [Applicant] with the care of my daughters and always 
found her to be honest, trustworthy and respectful.” (AE B, Tr. 68-70.) 
 
Israel 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy of about 6.4 million people. Israel generally 
respects the human rights of its citizens, although there have been some allegations 
of mistreatment of Palestinian detainees and discrimination against Israel’s Arab 
citizens. Despite the instability and armed conflict that have marked Israel's relations 
 
5 
 
 
within the region since it came into existence, Israel has developed a diversified, 
technologically advanced market economy focused on high-technology electronic and 
biomedical equipment, chemicals, and transport equipment.  
 
The United States and Israel have a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. In 1948, the United 
States was the first country to officially recognize Israel. In 1985, Israel and the United 
States concluded a Free Trade Agreement designed to strengthen economic ties by 
eliminating tariffs. The United States is Israel's largest trading partner. As of 2006, 
38.4% of Israel's exports went to the United States while 12.4% of its imports came 
from the United States. In 2007, Israel imported $7.8 billion of goods from the United 
States and exported $18.9 billion from the United States.  
 
Israel is a prominent recipient of U.S. aid. Since 1949, the United States has 
provided over $30 billion in economic assistance to Israel. Between 1976 and 2003, 
Israel was the largest recipient of U.S. foreign aid. The United States has also 
provided Israel with $9 billion in loan guarantees since 2003, which enable Israel to 
borrow money from commercial lenders at a lower rate. In April 1988, the United 
States and Israel established a Joint Economic Development Group to develop the 
Israeli economy by exchanging views of Israel economic policy planning, stabilization 
efforts, and structural reform.  
 
Although the United States has often publicly committed to Israel's security and 
well-being, Israel and the United States do not have a mutual defense agreement. In 
1989, Israel was one of the first countries designated a Major Non-NATO ally. As 
such, Israel receives preferential treatment in bidding for U.S. defense contracts and 
access to expanded weapons systems at lower prices. Israel and the United States 
are partners in the “Star Wars” missile defense project, and have concluded numerous 
treaties and agreements aimed at strengthening military ties, including agreements on 
mutual defense assistance, procurement, and security of information. Israel and the 
United States have established joint groups to further military cooperation. The two 
countries participate in joint military exercises and collaborate on military research and 
weapons development. The United States has pledged to ensure that Israel maintains 
a “qualitative military edge” over its neighbors, and has been a major source of Israeli 
military funding. Strong congressional support for Israel has resulted in Israel receiving 
benefits not available to other countries. Israeli is permitted to use part of its foreign 
military assistance grant for procurement spending from Israeli defense companies.  
 
 Israel and U.S. military and diplomatic goals are not always consistent. 
Although arms agreements between Israel and the United States limit the use of U.S. 
military equipment to defensive purposes, the United States has rebuked Israel for 
possible improper use of U.S.-supplied military equipment. The United States is 
concerned about Israeli settlements, Israel's military sales to China, Israel's 
inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-related cases 
implicating Israeli officials. In 2000, Israel was listed as one of the nations aggressively 
targeting U.S. economic intelligence. There are several cases of U.S. citizens 
 
6 
 
 
convicted for selling, or attempting to sell, classified documents to Israeli Embassy 
officials, and Israeli nationals indicted for espionage. There have also been 
investigations of the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of United States’ 
restricted, dual use technology to Israel. In Director of National Intelligence’s 2008 
Annual Threat Assessment, Israel is not identified in any way as representing a threat 
to or having interest inimical to the United States. 
 
 Improper release of sensitive and proprietary information potentially threatens 
U.S. national security in both military and economic terms. Industrial espionage is 
intelligence-gathering “conducted by a foreign government or by a foreign company 
with direct assistance of a foreign government against a private U.S. company for the 
purpose of obtaining commercial secrets.” Industrial espionage may target commercial 
secrets of a civilian nature, or commercial secrets that have military applications, 
resulting in disclosure of sensitive technology that can be used to harm the United 
States and its allies, and/or disclosure of classified information.  
 
Terrorist attacks are a continuing threat to Israel, and American interests in 
Israel. Terrorists in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza have injured or killed U.S. tourists, 
students, residents, and mission personnel. Due to the volatile security environment in 
Gaza and the West Bank, the United States continues to warn against any travel to 
those areas. In June 2007, Hamas, a State Department-designated foreign terrorist 
organization, assumed control over Gaza and in 2008, conflict between Hamas and 
Israel resulted in the loss of hundreds of lives.  
 
In 1996, Israel and the United States signed a Counterterrorism Cooperation 
Accord, which established a joint counterterrorism group aimed at enhancing the 
countries' capabilities to deter, respond to, and investigate international terrorist 
attacks or threats of international terrorist acts against Israel and the United States 
The United States is the principal international proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace 
process, and has been actively involved in negotiating an end to the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict. With the European Union, the United Nations, and Russia, the Bush 
Administration has been active in attempting to negotiate agreements between Israel 
and the Palestinian authority. The Obama administration has promised to continue to 
work for peace in the Middle East. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
7 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline B (foreign 
influence).  
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
8 
 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative 
lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant 
has frequent contacts with her in-laws and distant cousins, who are citizens and 
residents of Israel. These close relationships with her relatives create a heightened 
risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because Israel has an active 
collection program.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying 
conditions as a result of her being married to an Israeli citizen and her contacts and 
relationship with her in-laws and distant cousins, and her travel to Israel. The burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. As 
previously indicated, the burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Two Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies. With the exception of her sister-in-law’s husband, 
who is serving in the Israeli Army, Applicant’s in-laws and distant cousins are not 
associated with or connected with the Israeli government. Applicant’s husband is in 
the process of becoming a U.S. citizen. On the other hand, Applicant’s relatives do live 
in Israel, and she has emotional ties to them, as evidenced by her frequent contact 
with them and visits to Israel. With regard to her husband and Israeli relatives, 
Applicant did not establish “it is unlikely [she] will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of [her husband and relatives] and the interests of the 
U.S.” Her frequent contacts with her relatives in Israel could potentially force her to 
choose between the United States and Israel. On balance, she did not fully meet her 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationship with her husband and 
relatives] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant was born in the United States, was educated 
here, and lived in the United States her entire life. Her parents and two brothers live in 
the United States. She and her husband are completely vested in the U.S. Her 
husband has taken all possible steps to become a U.S. citizen, and her two young 
children are U.S. citizens by birth. Although Applicant is fond of her relatives in Israel, 
she has no immediate family members residing there. On the contrary, all of her 
immediate family members are resident citizens in the United States with whom she 
maintains frequent contact. 
 
Appellant has developed a sufficient relationship and loyalty to the United 
States, that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. All of her assets, as well of the assets of her husband, are in the United 
States. Applicant has been employed by her defense contractor employer since 
February 2009 and is very highly regarded at work. Applicant’s contacts and linkage to 
the U.S. are greater than her linkage to Israel. She is heavily vested in the United 
States -- financially and emotionally. 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole-person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole-person concept, 
the administrative judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”1  
 
The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are used for 
“whole-person” analysis. Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, 
voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth 
APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.2 In addition to the 
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2(c).     
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to 
the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within 
the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-
00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to Israel. Her husband is an Israeli citizen, she has relatives living in 
Israel, and she has undertaken time and expense to visit those relatives. She has 
frequent, non-casual contact with her relatives living in Israel. Applicant traveled to 
Israel four times since 2000. Although not alleged, she was a dual citizen with Israel 
and held an Israeli passport. However, she unilaterally addressed this concern by 
renouncing her Israeli citizenship, and she no longer has an Israeli passport. 
   
1 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 
4 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-
10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 
(App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic 
potential for exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting 
contention that eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole-person analysis in foreign influence 
cases). 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant is a U.S.-born citizen, who has lived in the United States her 
entire life. Her husband who has taken all necessary steps to become a U.S. citizen 
and all of her immediate family reside in the United States. Applicant was educated in 
the United States. She and her husband have set aside money for their children’s 
college education. Applicant has a successful career with a defense contractor. Her 
husband also has a successful career as an owner of a small business. Applicant and 
her husband own a home in the United States and are involved in their community. 
Applicant and her husband have no financial ties to Israel. All of Applicant’s immediate 
family is in the United States and she maintains a close relationship with them. In 
short, Applicant’s entire life is U.S.-based. Her ties to the United States are clearly 
stronger than her ties to Israel. She has no financial ties to Israel in contrast to his 
U.S. financial ties. She took the affirmative step of formally renouncing her Israeli 
citizenship, which exceed the requirements of “express[ing] a willingness to renounce 
dual citizenship.” There is no evidence she has ever taken any action which could 
cause potential harm to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s employer has considerable trust in her. This is clearly evident by the 
company official who submitted a letter on her behalf. Her supervisor, former mentor, 
and long-time family friend assess her as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, 
responsible, mature, and of high integrity. She has an excellent reputation as a friend, 
family member, employee and U.S. citizen. Her documentary evidence supports her 
for a security clearance. There is no derogatory information about her in the record.  
 
Israel is a highly developed, stable, democratic republic with a modern 
economy that has supported the U.S. war against terrorism. Israel is a country that 
has been and continues to be friendly with the U.S. for more than 50 years.  
 
This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate 
concern under the facts presented that the Israeli government or its agents might 
exploit or attempt to exploit Applicant’s immediate family members in such a way that 
this U.S. citizen would have to choose between her pledged loyalty to the U.S. and 
those family members.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
12 
 
 
has mitigated the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is 
eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e..: For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
