 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00446 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 26, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 19, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 27, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 16, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through C at the 
hearing, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE D through V, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum was 
marked HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2002. In his current position, he provides technical 
support to the military. He is a high school graduate and has one year of college credit. 
He is married and has three children, one of whom still lives at home. He served in the 
Army for 20 years and retired in September 2001, with an honorable discharge, as a 
sergeant first class (E-7). He has held an industrial security clearance since 2002.1  
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts and a prior bankruptcy discharge in 2002. 
The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on November 10, 2009, April 7, 2010, 
June 14, 2010, and August 13, 2010. Applicant admitted owing both debts alleged in the 
SOR and receiving a bankruptcy discharge in 2002.  
 
 Applicant attributes his 2002 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a) to events associated with 
his retirement from the Army. Shortly after retiring, Applicant moved his family to a new 
location. Initially, he had difficulty finding employment. He did find a job in the private 
sector, but the hourly pay, along with his military retirement income, was insufficient to 
pay his current bills. He also accumulated a large amount of credit card debt. He then 
sought bankruptcy protection. At the time, his total assets were $17,000 and his 
liabilities were $41,000. In September 2002, his Chapter 7 bankruptcy action was 
completed and his debts were discharged, including debts from 14 different credit card 
accounts.2  
 
 The two debts listed in the SOR resulted from a foreclosure action on Applicant’s 
home (SOR ¶ 1.c) and a related default on a home equity loan (HEL) (SOR ¶ 1.b). In 
July 2004, Applicant bought a home for approximately $287,000. He financed the home 
with an adjustable rate mortgage (ARM). He was aware, at the time he financed his 
home, the ARM would adjust in the future if interest rates rose. Initially, his monthly 
payments on his mortgage were about $1,700. He had no problems making those 
payments. In June 2005, Applicant took out a HEL to finance upgrades to the house 
and to pay some debt. His monthly mortgage and HEL payments rose to $2,200 and he 
was able to make those payments. In January or February 2007, his ARM adjusted 
upward and his monthly payments rose to $3,200. This latest increase was beyond 
what Applicant knew he could pay. He tried, unsuccessfully, to seek a loan modification. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8, 25-28; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
He and his wife consulted an attorney about various options he might have. Applicant 
and his wife decided that their best option was to allow foreclosure on their home 
mortgage and to default on the HEL. Applicant made a conscious decision to do so. He 
reasoned that in the long run, it was better to have a poor credit report for a few years 
than to pay this debt for a longer term. The house was foreclosed in July 2007 and sold 
at auction in March 2008. Prior to the home foreclosure, Applicant attempted to sell the 
house through a short sale with no success. At the time of foreclosure, Applicant owed 
between approximately $325,000 and $329,000 on the home. It sold for approximately 
$200,000 at auction. Applicant received a Form 1099-C cancellation of debt notice from 
his creditor relieving him of liability for the deficiency mortgage amount. The lender on 
the HEL loan tried to collect on this account. The lender offered to settle for $20,000, 
but Applicant did not have the money to settle. The last correspondence he received 
from the HEL lender was in early 2008. Applicant has not made any further payments 
on the HEL.3    
 
 Currently, Applicant’s combined net monthly income is approximately $6,300. His 
net monthly expenses are approximately $5,000. Included in his current expenses are 
payments on nine different credit card accounts. He also makes car payments on a 
2004 Mercedes Benz ($740 per month) and a 2006 Mustang ($466 per month). 
Applicant received credit counseling while in the Army and in connection with his 2002 
bankruptcy, but none since then.4 
 
 Applicant is well thought of by his co-workers. One co-worker described 
Applicant as “organized, reliable and a great asset.” Another co-worker stated, “his 
moral integrity and upstanding reputation remains undisputed.” Applicant was the 
recipient of numerous decorations and certificates from the Army.5   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 29-35, 44-56; AE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 56-61; AE L. 
 
5 AE A-C, M, O-V. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant sought bankruptcy protection and received a discharge of debts 
thereby establishing a history of not meeting financial obligations. Additionally, he 
defaulted on his home mortgage, resulting in foreclosure, and a HEL. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although Applicant’s bankruptcy happened in 2002, his subsequent financial 
problems, including a foreclosure and default on a HEL as recently as 2007-2008, cast 
doubt upon his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Applicant blames the foreclosure and HEL default on the $1,000 a month 
increase in his monthly mortgage payments due to an upward ARM adjustment. This 
circumstance was not unforeseen because Applicant was aware when he executed his 
ARM that such a contingency could happen. Additionally, Applicant chose to take out 
the HEL and spend the proceeds on home improvements and debt payments. These do 
not qualify as conditions that were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling prior to his 2002 bankruptcy, but none 
since then. Although he currently has no liability on the foreclosed mortgage debt, he 
made no efforts to resolve the HEL debt. Therefore, his debts are not being resolved 
 
6 
 
and his finances are not under control. It is notable that Applicant continues to maintain 
numerous credit cards despite his past financial problems. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are 
not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s 20 years of honorable Army service and numerous 
awards and training certificates. I also considered the support he received from his co-
workers. I also found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe he 
is sincere about getting his finances in order. However, he seems to be repeating the 
same mistakes that led to his bankruptcy and then to his mortgage and HEL defaults by 
funding expensive cars and using nine credit cards. Additionally, I am troubled by 
Applicant’s conscious decision to default on the HEL without making a good faith effort 
to repay the debt. This does not show good judgment which must be considered in a 
security context. His past financial track record, that includes a prior bankruptcy action, 
raises questions about his willingness to resolve his debts and live within his means.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
