 
 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-00228 
                       ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (SF 86) dated August 19, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
 
2
                                                
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On June 15, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated July 1, 2010, Applicant requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 
29, 2010, and I received the case on August 4, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on August 10, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 24, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant testified, and did not present witnesses. 
He offered six exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through F. I held 
the record open to allow him to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted 
five documents, which I admitted as AE G through K. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on August 30, 2010. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
DOHA issued Notice of Hearing on August 10, 2010, and Applicant received it on 
August 19, 2010. The hearing was convened on August 24, 2010. Applicant is entitled 
to 15 days notice under the Directive. However, Department Counsel contacted 
Applicant on or before October 21, 2010, at least 27 days before the hearing, and 
therefore, Applicant's notice of the hearing date was sufficient under the Directive. (Tr. 
8-9) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant denied SOR allegation 1.a. and admitted the remaining 
ten allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old single man. He married in 1995, and his divorce was 
final in 2006. He pays child support for his two daughters, who are 10 and 15 years of 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2Adjudication of this case is controlled by the adjudicative guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3
age. He has worked full-time as a software developer for a defense contractor 
(company A) since 2002. In 2010, he went to a part-time status with company A, and 
began a full-time job at company B in July 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 29-32, 68-71) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant met his future fiancée. She held an administrative position and 
earned between $40,000 and $50,000 annually. In 2005, Applicant purchased a 
condominium and they moved in together. They were both employed, and they did not 
have financial problems. They became engaged in April 2007. Applicant applied for a 
$53,000 second mortgage, with the understanding that they would each pay half of the 
debts. They used the funds from the second mortgage for home improvements, and to 
pay off a car loan and several credit card balances. They planned to use some of the 
funds for their honeymoon. They also purchased a BMW in November 2007. The 
following month, in December 2007, Applicant's fiancée lost her job. After a few months, 
Applicant's mortgage loan and debts started to become delinquent. Applicant's fiancée 
found a job in August 2008. However, she refused to share responsibility for the debts, 
and she left in late 2008. (GE 2, 5, 6; Tr. 24-26, 40-49) 
 
In January 2009, Applicant began a plan with his lender to rehabilitate his 
mortgage loan. He made his monthly payment of $1,392, plus an additional $1,100. 
After two or three months paying $2,500, the lender suggested he apply for the Making 
Home Affordable (MHA) plan. He agreed, and began paying at a reduced rate of 
$1,365. In November, 2009, however, he was informed that his income was over the 
limit to qualify for the plan. In December, 2009, the mortgage lender stopped accepting 
his payments, and will not accept any until an alternate plan is in place. At the time of 
the hearing, Applicant was approximately $15,000 behind. The lender informed him that 
it will not foreclose while Applicant is under consideration for the Making Home 
Affordable Plan. He has been saving the payments he would have been making. (AE D, 
E, F; Tr. 51-59) 
 
In January 2010, the lender informed Applicant that he made an error in his 
application for the Making Home Affordable plan because he failed to include his child 
support payments. He was told to re-submit his application. As of the date of the 
hearing, he was still under consideration for the MHA plan. (AE C; Tr. 58-62) 
 
Since 2008, Applicant has focused primarily on resolving his home mortgage 
delinquencies. He did not enlist the help of a credit counseling or debt consolidation 
firm. He decided that once he made arrangements with the mortgage lenders, he would 
work on payment plans for his other debts. However, after working on his mortgage for 
almost two years without a resolution, and with his other debts becoming more 
delinquent, Applicant considered bankruptcy. In March 2010, he consulted an attorney 
about filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, and paid a $500 deposit. His attorney 
advised him not to make payments on any debts because, in light of his upcoming 
bankruptcy petition, he could not pay some and not others. In addition, they would be 
included in the petition. In May and June 2010, he received two offers to settle his 
second mortgage for $5,000 instead of $52,000, but he did not respond to the offers 
 
 
4
                                                
and did not seek his attorney’s advice about accepting the settlement offer. Applicant 
completed the bankruptcy paperwork, but did not go forward with filing the petition. He 
thought that he might be able to work out payment plans for the other debts if the MHA 
modification came through. After the hearing, Applicant submitted evidence that on 
September 1, 2010, he paid $700 to his attorney to proceed with the bankruptcy 
petition. (GE 2; AE A, B, K; Tr. 27-28, 36, 39-40, 63) 
 
In March 2010, Applicant worked full-time for company A and had a monthly net 
income of $4,904. His monthly expenses and debt payments totaled $4,669, leaving a 
monthly net remainder of $235. In mid-2010, he went to part-time status at company A 
and now works about 20 hours per week. He earns a net monthly income of 
approximately $4,600. In July 2010, Applicant started working full-time in information 
technology for company B, in addition to his part-time job. His net monthly income is 
$5,000. He also earns about $700 per month doing freelance website work. He pays 
$1,240 monthly toward child support, and provides intermittent funds for his children’s 
books and other expenses. (GE 2; AE I, J; Tr. 62, 68-71)  
 
Applicant has about $3,000 in checking and savings accounts, as well as about 
$5,000 that his parents are holding to make his mortgage payments. He has about 
$1,500 in a 401k account. He has not taken a vacation in ten years. He has a 2007 
BMW. He tried to trade it in when his fiancée lost her job, but was unsuccessful. His car 
payments are up-to-date. (Tr. 63-68) 
 
 Applicant's SOR debts appear in credit reports dated September 2009 and April 
2010 (GE 6, 7) The largest debts are Applicant's mortgage loans totaling $250,800, with 
about $15,000 past due. The non-mortgage debts in the SOR total $27,817, and are 
mainly credit card accounts. The SOR also includes a tax debt at allegation 1.a. It 
resulted when Applicant began his own business in the 1990s and did not know how to 
handle the business taxes. His tax refunds were applied to the debt and Applicant 
provided evidence that it was paid in 1999. (GE 3, 4; AE H; Tr. 33-35) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
5
                                                
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began in 2008, and remain unpaid. He is about 
$15,000 behind in his mortgage payments, and owes almost $28,000 in non-mortgage 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6
debt. The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant's debts are both numerous and recent, as they have continued from 
2008 to the present. His lack of diligence in relation to the non-mortgage debts casts 
doubt on his good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant's financial delinquencies resulted from unexpected events in 2007-
2008 – the loss of his fiancée’s job, eight months without her contribution of $40,000 to 
$50,000 to the household income, and her subsequent refusal to share expenses when 
she did obtain a job, and her departure. Applicant could not predict his fiancée’s 
actions, and they had a serious negative impact on his finances. However, Applicant 
did not act reasonably when he decided to concentrate his efforts on his mortgage, to 
the exclusion of all of his other debts. He had two years in which to work with the other 
creditors, and he did not. He can claim only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b). In addition, 
he did not seek financial counseling during the two years that his debts mounted. His 
financial situation is not under control, and AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Since 2008, Applicant worked with his lender to ensure that he was able to keep 
his house. He made significant efforts to resolve the mortgage debts. He has been in 
 
 
7
contact with the lender, paid additional monthly payments, and applied for a loan 
modification. His past-due balance stems in part from the lender’s refusal to accept his 
payments while the modification is being considered. He did make a good-faith effort in 
regard to his mortgage debt. However, he made no effort to work with creditors for the 
remaining significant non-mortgage debt. He accrued almost $28,000 in these other 
delinquencies, and made no effort to contact creditors, establish payment plans, or 
otherwise resolve them. His efforts in regard to bankruptcy have been intermittent and 
unconvincing. Though the record remained open after the hearing, he submitted only a 
cancelled check, with no further confirmation that the process had was underway. 
Applicant's lack of effort in relation to substantial non-mortgage debt precludes full 
mitigation under AG 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant had a good financial record in 2007 and earlier, as shown by his ability 
to qualify for a home loan, and for a second mortgage. His fortunes unexpectedly 
changed when his fiancée lost her job and he had to pay for numerous expenses that 
he had taken on when he had a significantly larger income. To his credit, he worked 
consistently with the mortgage lender to keep his house. But his failure to make any 
effort in regard to his other debts demonstrates a lack of willingness to pay his 
legitimate financial obligations. He earns a substantial income and could have made 
some effort to contact creditors, arrange payment plans, or otherwise deal with his 
delinquencies. He did not consult with his attorney after receiving a settlement offer 
that would have allowed him to resolve a $52,000 debt for $5,000. Finally, Applicant 
 
 
8
does not appear committed to filing the bankruptcy petition, and I am not convinced 
that he will follow through with the Chapter 13 petition. Under the Appeal Board 
jurisprudence, an Applicant does not have to show that he paid every debt, or paid 
every debt in full; but he does have to show that he has a viable plan in place and has 
taken steps to implement that plan. With the unknown result on his MHA application, a 
lack of commitment to filing bankruptcy, and no plan to resolve the other $28,000 in 
delinquent debt, Applicant does not meet this standard.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.k.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
