 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-00658 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On July 22, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2010 and DOHA received it on June 8, 
2010. On June 30, 2010, he filed a request that the case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. DOHA received said request on July 6, 2010. On August 2, 
 
2 
 
 
2010, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 11 
items and mailed Applicant a complete copy on August 3, 2010. Applicant received the 
FORM on August 10, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. He did not submit any additional documentation. On 
October 26, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶ 1.a 
and denied those in ¶ 1.b and ¶ 1.c. His admissions are incorporated into the following 
findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is twice-divorced 
and has two adult children. Since May 2008, he has worked as a watchman/security 
guard for his current employer. Prior to this employment, he was a self-employed 
painter for many years. (Item 5.) 
 
 On November 25, 2009, Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss 
past due financial accounts. During that interview, he indicated that he would contact his 
former cable company about an outstanding $229 bill. He denied owing money to either 
the state or federal government for unpaid taxes. He explained that as part of his 
second divorce settlement, he received $72,000 from his former wife’s retirement fund, 
of which he used $20,000 to purchase a home and the remainder he transferred into 
another retirement fund. He stated that his sister offered to help him resolve and pay the 
taxes, and that he would contact the taxing bodies. (Item 6.) In response to 
interrogatories sent to him in March 2010, he reiterated that he disputed the tax liens. 
Along with that response, he submitted a budget, which listed his monthly net income as 
$3,972 and expenses as $2,500, leaving approximately $1,400 remaining. (Item 7.)    
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated August 2009, February 2010, and 
April 2010, the SOR alleged a state tax lien for $6,289, a federal tax lien for $21,242, 
and a $229 collection account for cable company, totaling $27,760. The state tax lien 
was filed in 2003 and the federal tax lien was filed in 2004. The collection account 
became delinquent in June 2008. (Items 8, 9, 10.) In his answer, he admitted owing the 
cable bill, but denied owing the taxes assessed against him. (Item 4.) 
 
Applicant offered no corroborating evidence of any voluntary payment toward or 
attempt to resolve these debts. He submitted a statement and document from the state 
indicating that $1,232 was seized by the federal government in October 2009 and 
asserting that it was applied to the outstanding federal tax lien. (Item 7.) He provided no 
evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He submitted no character 
references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or 
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and his statements, Applicant has been unwilling to satisfy 
three delinquent debts that began accruing in 2003. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies arose in 2003 and 2004 when two tax liens were 
filed. Those and a delinquent debt from 2008 remain unresolved. Because the problems 
are ongoing and not isolated, there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the 
indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  He did 
not present credible evidence that the accumulation of $27,760 of debt was due to 
conditions beyond his control or that he attempted to responsibly manage those debts 
once it accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). He did not 
submit evidence that he received credit counseling or that he paid or resolved the tax 
liens and one small delinquent debt, which would indicate that the situation is coming 
under control. Nor, did he present evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay any 
of the three debts.  Despite his statements throughout the record that he disputed the 
debts, Applicant did not provide documentation verifying that he formally disputed the 
tax liens or cable bill, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG & 20(d). There 
is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since May 2008.  In November 2009, he learned of 
the Government’s concerns relating to two tax liens and one collection account, and 
indicated his willingness to resolve the matters. The tax problems have been 
outstanding since 2004. In March 2010, the Government again notified him of its 
concerns. In May 2010, DOHA filed a SOR. In August 2010, the Government filed the 
FORM. For almost nine months, he has been on notice that the tax liens and $229 debt 
were creating security concerns and potentially affecting his employment.  Despite that 
knowledge, he did not provide proof that he has taken steps to address the liens or pay 
the small $229 cable company bill. Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
rehabilitation, which would tend to indicate that the recurrence or continuance of these 
unaddressed obligations is unlikely. The record contains insufficient other evidence 
about his character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or 
make their continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:             Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
