 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01293 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Drug Involvement concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response that was received by 
DOHA on September 13, 2010, and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
 
2 
 
case on September 22, 2010. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM on October 4, 2010. He answered the FORM on October 
20, 2010. He did not object to the admission of the items attached to the FORM, and 
they are admitted. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response, and it is 
admitted. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. His Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86), submitted in October 2009, listed that he has worked for his current employer 
since August 2002, he has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 2002, he has never 
been married, and he does not have children.1  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana when he was a senior in high school. He used 
marijuana sporadically while he was in college. His marijuana use increased after he 
graduated college, and he smoked marijuana regularly from 2002 to 2009. He estimated 
that he smoked marijuana almost daily during this period, but he occasionally went 
several weeks without using marijuana. He used LSD on about six occasions between 
2007 and 2009. He purchased the marijuana and LSD that he used.2   
 
 Applicant listed his marijuana and LSD use on his October 2009 SF 86. He was 
interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 
November 2009. He fully discussed his marijuana and LSD use. He told the investigator 
that he was considering quitting illegal drug use and getting his life more together. He 
stated that he still had some marijuana and he would likely smoke it, but he might not 
use marijuana again after he used what he had in his possession. When he responded 
to DOHA interrogatories in April 2010, Applicant wrote “[m]arijuana also relaxes [him] 
after a long day of work and helps [him] sleep at night.”3   
 
 In his October 20, 2010, response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he quit his 
illegal drug use. He stated that it had been 4 weeks since he last used marijuana and 
almost 11 months since he used LSD. He stated that he realized that his recreational 
drug use was preventing him from setting and accomplishing goals in his professional 
and social life. He had no desire to resume his illegal drug use and was looking forward 
to a life without marijuana. He stated that he was “willing to do whatever it may take, 
including submitting to multiple random drug tests during a probation period, to prove 
[his] commitment.”4   
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 3-5. 
 
3 Items 4, 5. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;5  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
 Applicant’s drug possession and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) 
as disqualifying conditions. When Applicant was interviewed in November 2009, he 
indicated that he would likely continue to smoke the marijuana that he possessed until it 
ran out. AG ¶ 25(h) was applicable at that point. He has since stopped using illegal 
drugs. AG ¶ 25(h) is no longer applicable. SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
                                                          
5 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana in high school and used it regularly for 
years. He also used LSD on several occasions. He continued to use marijuana after he 
submitted his SF 86, he was interviewed by OPM, he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories, and he responded to the SOR. He last used illegal drugs about four 
weeks before October 20, 2010, which would have been about September 22, 2010. 
There is no bright-line rule for when conduct is recent. Applicant has not used illegal 
drugs for about three months. His response appears to indicate that he is sincere in his 
desire to remain drug-free. However, his drug use was extensive, occurred over a long 
period, and continued after it became clear that illegal drug use is inconsistent with the 
holding of a security clearance. I am unable to make a determination that illegal drug 
use is completely in Applicant’s past. His drug use continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable. Applicant 
stated he does not intend to abuse drugs in the future. He does not receive full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant has been honest about his illegal drug use throughout the processing 
of his application for a security clearance. He has not used illegal drugs since 
September 2010. His honest answers and his abstinence from illegal drug use 
constitute positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable to the Personal Conduct security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s illegal drug use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 30 years old. He used illegal drugs for many years and continued until after 
he responded to the SOR. He deserves credit for abstaining from illegal drug use since 
September 2010 and for being truthful throughout the process. However, concerns 
remain about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
 
7 
 
mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated Drug 
Involvement concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
