                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-02355 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana, methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA), cocaine, and psilocybin. Her illegal drug possession and usage are too recent 
to be mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 14, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (Item 4). On 
August 3, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement). (Item 
1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On August 18, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (Item 2) She 
was advised of her right to a hearing, and she did not request a hearing. (Item 2; 
Directive at ¶ E3.1.4.) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated 
October 13, 2010, was provided to her on October 21, 2010. She was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
December 10, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, she admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h.3 She 
acknowledged that she used MDMA intermittently from November 2007 to May 2009, 
and that she used illegal drugs while in England from September 2006 to May 2009. 
She no longer associates with illegal drug users, and she offered to sign a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Her admissions are 
accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as an office 
administrator.4 In 2009, she received a bachelor’s degree from a university in the United 
Kingdom. She has not served in the military. She has never married.   
 
Drug involvement  
 
From November 2006 to December 2008, Applicant used marijuana and cocaine. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c; Item 2) From November 2007 to May 2009, she used MDMA also 
known as ecstasy. (SOR ¶ 1.e; Item 2) Around February or March 2008, she used 
hallucinogenic mushrooms (psilocybin). (SOR ¶ 1.g; Item 2) She also purchased 
marijuana, cocaine, MDMA, and hallucinogenic mushrooms. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h; 
Item 2)  
 
Applicant’s December 14, 2009 SF 86 indicates she used illegal drugs from 
November 2006 to December 2008, stating: 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated October 15, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is dated October 
22, 2010. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after her receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Item 2, Applicant’s SOR response, is the basis for the facts in this paragraph. 
 
4Item 1, Applicant’s SF 86, is the basis for the facts in this paragraph. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
It was all recreational/experimental while I was attending university in the 
UK. I only used maybe once every few months. The mushrooms I only 
tried one time when I went on my Amsterdam trip. I was never addicted to 
anything, or needed any kind of rehabilitation. It was all from curiosity, and 
I don’t plan on ever doing it again. Approximate count: Marijuana: 5 times 
Cocaine: 4 times MDMA: 5 times Mushrooms: 1 time. 
 
Item 1 at 51 of 58.  
 
In Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview 
(PSI) on January 14, 2010, she admitted more extensive illegal drug use.5 Applicant 
used cocaine approximately every two to three months from November 2006 to 
November 2008 for a total of eight to twelve times. She purchased one or two grams of 
cocaine on three or four occasions. She shared cocaine with others.   
 
 Applicant used MDMA every three or four months with friends from November 
2007 to May 30, 2009. She purchased one or two grams of MDMA, and shared her 
MDMA with friends. From November 2006 to December 2008, she used marijuana four 
times every two or three months. She purchased one-eighth of an ounce of marijuana 
on one occasion. In February or March 2008 in Amsterdam, she purchased and used 
hallucinogenic mushrooms. She was unaware possession and use of hallucinogenic 
mushrooms or psilocybin in Amsterdam was illegal. She did not subsequently possess 
or use psilocybin.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
5 The information in this paragraph and the next paragraph is from Applicant’s OPM PSI. (Item 3)  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline H (drug involvement) 
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular 
case. AG ¶ 25(a), indicates, “any drug abuse,”6 and AG ¶ 25(c) states, “illegal drug 
possession,” could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s 
case.  
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 
are not applicable. These disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used and 
possessed marijuana, cocaine, psilocybin, and ecstasy.7 She disclosed her drug abuse 
in her SF 86, her OPM PSI, her responses to DOHA interrogatories, and her SOR 
response. She possessed marijuana, cocaine, psilocybin, and ecstasy before she used 
these substances.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
 
6AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
7AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana, ecstasy or 3, 4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine, and psilocybin are Schedule (Sch.) 
I controlled substances. See Sch. I(c)(9), I(c)(10), and I(c)(15) respectively. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 
545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 449 
F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 2006) (ecstasy). Cocaine is a Sch. II Controlled Substance. See Sch. II(a)(4) 
(cocaine). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows “a significant 
period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative 
judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”8 
 
Applicant used cocaine approximately every two to three months from November 
2006 to November 2008. She used MDMA every three or four months with friends from 
November 2007 to May 30, 2009. From November 2006 to December 2008, she used 
marijuana four times every two or three months. Applicant’s last MDMA use was recent 
because it was in May 2009, or about 19 months ago. She recognizes the adverse 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20-plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. The Appeal Board addressed the recency 
of drug use, stating:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
impact on her life of drug abuse. These actions create some certitude that she will 
continue to abstain from drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to her drug-related 
offenses.9    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. She has disassociated from her drug-using associates and 
contacts. She has broken her patterns of drug abuse, and she has changed her life with 
respect to illegal drug use. Applicant offered to provide “a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” Although she has abstained 
from drug abuse for 19 months, in light of her extensive period of drug abuse, she has 
not had a sufficient period of abstinence to fully mitigate drug involvement concerns. AG 
¶ 26(b) partially apples.   
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. Marijuana, 
cocaine, psilocybin, and ecstasy were never prescribed for her. She did not satisfactorily 
complete a prescribed drug treatment program. Moreover, she cannot receive full credit 
because she did not provide “a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional, including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements.” 
  
In conclusion, Applicant ended her drug abuse in May 2009, about 19 months 
ago.10 The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. She understands the 
 
9In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
10The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative 
judge considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were 
mitigated. ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). Here, Applicant used 
marijuana, cocaine, psilocybin, and MDMA. Her repeated abuse of these particular drugs is relevant in 
the whole-person analysis. In ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008), the Appeal Board 
explained it is the overall conduct that determines whether a clearance should be granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole-person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
(punctuation corrected). See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole-
Person Concept at pages 8-9, infra.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
adverse results from drug abuse.11 She has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to partially, but not completely, mitigate drug involvement as a 
bar to her access to classified information. If she continues to refrain from drug abuse, 
there is no reason why she would not be able to fully mitigate drug involvement 
concerns after a more significant period of abstinence from illegal drug possession and 
use has elapsed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when she used illegal drugs. Applicant’s SF 86, 
admitted that she used illegal drugs. She continued to admit her drug use in her OPM 
interview, response to DOHA interrogatories, and response to the SOR. Her admissions 
of drug use are a positive sign that Applicant is taking responsibility for her drug use in 
the context of her security clearance. She only possessed and used hallucinogenic 
mushrooms or psilocybin on one occasion. Her one-time abuse of psilocybin is 
mitigated. She stopped using all illegal drugs in May 2009, and has made a commitment 
to refrain from using illegal drugs in the future. She knows the consequences of drug 
abuse. Applicant contributes to her company and the Department of Defense. There is 
no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. For example, there is no evidence 
she used illegal drugs at work. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that she would 
intentionally violate national security. Her employer has sponsored her for a security 
clearance, which is an indication of her good character and work performance. Her work 
 
11Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
performance shows some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. Her supervisors 
evidently support her or she would not have been able to retain her employment after 
her security clearance was called into question.     
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at this 
time. Applicant did not fully admit the extent of her drug abuse on her SF 86, and her 
more extensive statement of her drug abuse in her OPM PSI and in her SOR response 
is accepted as more accurate. Applicant possessed and used marijuana on numerous 
occasions, and to a lesser extent, cocaine and MDMA. She possessed and used illegal 
drugs overseas from September 2006 to May 2009. She has not received drug 
counseling or treatment. Each time she used illegal drugs, she possessed the illegal 
drugs before she used them. Each time she possessed and used illegal drugs, she 
showed poor judgment. Most of her drug use involved use in a social setting with drug-
using friends. Essentially she yielded to peer pressure and accepted and used drugs 
she received or purchased herself from others. She knew what she was doing was 
wrong, and did it anyway. Her poor judgment exposed her to possible sanctions from 
her university or law enforcement officials.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude she has not mitigated the 
drug involvement security concern at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance at this time.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
