                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------        )  ISCR Case No. 10-00586 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jennifer Kies Mammen, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in United States. Her mother is a U.S. citizen and her father 
is a Liberian citizen. Her father took her to Liberia, where she attended high school. She 
attended college and law school in France, and earned an LLM degree in the United 
States. Her father remarried, and now lives in Ethiopia. Her most recent travel outside 
the United States was in 2004, and that travel was on behalf of the U.S. Government. 
She has much greater connections to the United States than to Liberia or Ethiopia. 
Foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (hereinafter SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On 
May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to her, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
 
2 
 
                                           
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for her, and it recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted. 
 
On June 29, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On August 6, 2010, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On August 8, 2010, the case was 
assigned to me. On August 25, 2010, DOHA issued a hearing notice, and the hearing 
was held as scheduled on October 14, 2010. (HE 1) At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered two exhibits (GE 1-2) (Transcript (Tr.) 14), and Applicant offered three 
exhibits. (Tr. 46-47, 55, 59; AE A-C) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-2 
and AE A-C. (Tr. 14-15, 46-47, 55, 59) Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the 
SOR, and the hearing notice. (HE 1-3) On October 22, 2010, I received the hearing 
transcript.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant requested administrative notice of facts 
concerning Liberia and Ethiopia. (Tr. 9-12; Administrative Notice Requests) Department 
Counsel and Applicant provided supporting documents to show detail and context for 
these facts in the Administrative Notice request. Id. Department Counsel and Applicant 
did not object to me taking administrative notice of the facts in the documents. (Tr. 9-12) 
The Liberia and Ethiopia sections of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, contain 
the material facts from Department Counsel and Applicant’s submissions on Liberia and 
Ethiopia.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted some of the underlying facts alleged in the SOR; however, 
she denied that she was vulnerable to foreign influence in her response to the SOR. 
(HE 3) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in this section are Applicant’s SF-86 (GE 1) her Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), or her responses to DOHA interrogatories. 
(GE 1-2) 
 
3 
 
                                           
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 37, 42) Her 
current employer has employed her for almost one year. (Tr. 42) Applicant was born in 
the United States, attended some of her grammar school in the United States, high 
school in Ethiopia, college in France, and law school in France. (Tr. 37-38; HE 3 at 3) 
She earned an LLM in 1997 in the United States. (Tr. 38-40; HE 3 at 3) After she 
graduated from law school, she worked in a U.S. bank for five years. (Tr. 41) Then she 
worked for U.S. Government contractors for several years. (Tr. 41; HE 3 at Encl. 1) She 
is currently employed as a contracts administrator. (Tr. 43) She has never been 
married. (GE 1) 
 
Applicant’s connections to Liberia and Ethiopia 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Liberia and resides in Ethiopia. (Tr. 65; SOR ¶ 
1.a) He is 67 years old. (GE 2 at 24; HE 3 at 2) Her father works for the Liberian 
Government. (Tr. 65; GE 2 at 12; SOR ¶ 1.b) He hopes to retire from his Liberian 
Government employment late in 2010 or early in 2011. (Tr. 98)2 He received a 
bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees in the United States. (Tr. 65; HE 3 at 2) After 
he completed his Ph.D, he worked for a state government for several years. (Tr. 66) He 
also worked for a private U.S. company and for the United Nations in Ethiopia. (Tr. 66-
67) He worked for the United Nations for 10 to 12 years. (Tr. 89) Applicant’s family lived 
in an African country from 1978 to 1982. (HE 3 at 3) He also worked for another 
international entity for seven or eight years. (Tr. 90) Applicant speaks with her father 
about five minutes every two or three weeks; however, sometimes she talks to him 
longer or communicates with him less frequently. (Tr. 68-69, 96-97; GE 2 at 24, 30) 
They discuss how their families are doing, and do not discuss work. (Tr. 69) He knows 
she works in contracts administration; however, he is not aware she is seeking a 
security clearance. (Tr. 69; HE 3 at 5) He travels to the United States and visits 
Applicant every two years or so, and he was most recently in the United States at the 
end of 2009. (Tr. 70) If her father ever asked her to violate security, she would not do 
so. (Tr. 71) She would report the request to compromise security to security personnel. 
(Tr. 71)   
 
Applicant’s father remarried in 1990 after Applicant had left her father’s home. 
(Tr. 72; HE 3 at 10) Applicant’s step-mother is a citizen of Liberia and resides in 
Ethiopia. (Tr. 72; SOR ¶ 1.c; HE 3 at 10) She works for the United Nations. (Tr. 73) 
Applicant is not close to her step-mother. (Tr. 72) Applicant speaks to her step-mother 
once or twice a year. (Tr. 73; GE 2 at 30; HE 3 at 10) She does not call to speak to her 
step-mother; however, sometimes her step-mother answers the telephone. (Tr. 73) She 
has not visited her father while he has been in Ethiopia. (GE 2 at 24) She has never 
served in a foreign military. (GE 2 at 25)  
 
Applicant’s two half brothers are citizens of the United States and no longer 
reside in Ethiopia. (Tr. 74; SOR ¶ 1.d) They now reside in the United States. (Tr. 77) 
They are college freshmen and live at a U.S. university. (Tr. 77-78) She has never lived 
 
2For purposes of this decision, I will assume that the Liberian Government continues to employ 
Applicant’s father, and that he continues to work in Ethiopia.   
 
4 
 
with her step-brothers and is not close to them. (Tr. 77-78) She speaks to her step-
brothers every couple of months. (Tr. 78; GE 2 at 30) They have been in the United 
States for three months, and she has spoken to them twice. (Tr. 78) 
 
Applicant’s two half sisters (ages 12 and 14) are citizens of the United States and 
reside in Ethiopia. (Tr. 74; SOR ¶ 1.e) She has never lived with her step-sisters and is 
not close to them. (Tr. 75) She speaks to her step-sisters once or twice a year on the 
telephone. (Tr. 76; GE 2 at 30) 
 
Applicant has an aunt and an uncle who are in their 60s. (Tr. 79-81) Her aunt is a 
nursing assistant. (Tr. 79) Her uncle has lived in the United States for about 20 years. 
(Tr. 81) They are citizens of Liberia and reside in the United States. (Tr. 79-81) (SOR ¶ 
1.f) She communicates with her aunt about once every six weeks. (Tr. 80)  
 
Applicant’s aunt, uncle, half-brothers, and half-sisters do not know anything 
about her work and are not aware that she has applied for a security clearance. (Tr. 76, 
79, 81-83) She will not tell any of her relatives if she is granted a security clearance. (Tr. 
84) If any of her relatives asked for classified information, she would not provide 
classified information, and she would inform security of the request. (Tr. 84) She would 
not provide the classified information. (Tr. 84-85) Similarly, if a third party attempted to 
coerce her through her relatives in Ethiopia, she would not agree to the request, and 
would report the attempt to security. (Tr. 86) 
 
Applicant does not have any assets in Liberia, Ethiopia, or any other country 
except the United States. (Tr. 60) She does not receive any financial support from her 
overseas family, and does not provide any money to them. (Tr. 61)  
 
Applicant received a Liberian passport in 1987 and in 2004. (GE 2 at 3) She used 
her Liberian passport in 1986, 1989, 1990, and 1991 to visit several African countries. 
(GE 2 at 3) In 2004, when her father worked for the Liberian Government, he provided 
her a Liberian passport. (Tr. 50-51) She did not request it, and she never used it. (Tr. 
51, 92, 95) After about six months, she returned the Liberian passport to her father, and 
he destroyed it. (Tr. 52, 92-95) She is not a citizen of Liberia, and has never used any 
benefits from Liberia. (Tr. 53) If she were a citizen of Liberia, she would renounce that 
citizenship. (Tr. 53) She has no loyalty to Liberia. (Tr. 54) 
 
Applicant’s connections to the United States 
 
Applicant was born in the United States, attended some grammar school in the 
United States, and traveled to the United States each summer from school in France. 
(HE 3 at 3) Applicant has lived independently since she left her father’s home to go to 
college. (Tr. 68) She settled in the United States after completing law school in France 
1994. (HE 3 at 3) Applicant’s mother is an American citizen. (Tr. 40) Her mother was 
born in the United States, and she lives in the United States. (Tr. 63; HE 3) Her mother 
earned a degree from a U.S. university and worked for a state government. (HE 3) 
Applicant speaks with her mother about once a week. (Tr. 63) Her mother’s brother is a 
 
5 
 
Vietnam War veteran. (HE 3 at 2) Applicant provides contracts administration support to 
a U.S. Government contractor. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant’s most recent travel outside the United States was in 2004, and that 
travel was on behalf of the U.S. Government. (HE 3 at 4) She used her U.S. passport to 
travel to Liberia in 2004 on a USAID-sponsored project. (Tr. 47) The U.S. Government 
funded her 2004 trip to Liberia. (Tr. 48; HE 3 at 4) She has no plans to travel to Ethiopia 
or Liberia in the future. (Tr. 49-50) If she travels outside the United States, she plans to 
use her U.S. passport. (Tr. 50) 
 
Applicant is active in her local community. She is a member of the Parent 
Teachers Association at her son’s school. (Tr. 54) She votes in U.S. national and local 
elections. (Tr. 54, 57-58) She owns her home in the United States. (Tr. 54, 58) She is a 
member of a local church. (HE 3 at 4) She pays all of her taxes. (HE 3 at 4) She also 
has a retirement account and financial accounts in the United States. (Tr. 58)  
 
Applicant’s son, who is ten years old, was born in the United States. (Tr. 61-62; 
HE 3 at 4) Applicant’s son lives with her. (Tr. 62)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s manager at her current employment has known her for more than a 
year and describes her as trustworthy and ethical. (HE 2 at Encl. 2) She demonstrates 
integrity and provides consistently high quality work. Id. She recommends approval of 
Applicant’s security clearance. Id.  
 
A witness with a master’s degree in acquisition and contracts management, who 
has worked for U.S. Government contractors for 26 years, has known Applicant for one 
year. (Tr. 21-25) She lauded Applicant’s honesty, professionalism, conscientious 
compliance with rules and procedures, diligence, reliability, contributions to mission 
accomplishment, and trustworthiness. (Tr. 26-35) She is close to her son, and she is a 
loyal, patriotic American. (Tr. 31-34) 
 
Ethiopia 
 
Ethiopia has had a positive relationship with the United States since 1903. 
Ethiopia has a population of 80 million people and is located in the Horn of Africa. 
Ethiopia is a free republic with a developing economy based on agriculture. Ethiopia has 
begun economic reform and privatization of state enterprises.  
 
While Ethiopia is generally stable, domestic insurgent groups and extremists 
from Somalia provide security risks, especially in the Afar regions of Ethiopia. Human 
rights abuses occur in Ethiopia, such as unlawful killings, torture, beatings, mistreatment 
of detainees, arbitrary arrest and detention, administrative and judicial corruption, illegal 
searches, use of excessive force by security services, and restrictions on freedom of the 
press, assembly and association.     
 
 
6 
 
Ethiopia and the United States signed a mutual defense agreement in 1953. The 
U.S. Government provided nearly $5 billion in aid to Ethiopia between 1999 and 2009. 
The United States considers Ethiopia an important partner in the region, and Ethiopia 
has supported American counter-terrorism efforts. 
 
 The Office of National Counterintelligence Executive did not include Ethiopia in 
the Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage, and Ethiopia is not included on the Department of State’s list of state 
sponsors of terrorism.   
 
Liberia 
 
Liberia has had a close and friendly relationship with the United States from its 
founding by Americans returning to Africa after their emancipation from slavery. In 1847, 
Liberia declared independence. In 1980, Samuel K. Doe seized power in a military coup 
d’etat. Doe maintained good relations with the United States despite ethnic tensions and 
corruption. In 1989, Charles Taylor initiated a civil war that lasted until 1996. During the 
civil war, over 200,000 people were killed and one million others were displaced to 
neighboring countries. From 1997 until 2003, Charles Taylor ran Liberia, and poverty, 
unemployment, and illiteracy increased. After a transitional government, and the “most 
free, fair, and peaceful elections in Liberia’s history,” Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf was elected 
president in 2005. Department of State, Bureau of African Affairs, Background Note: 
Liberia (June 1, 2010) at 4. President Sirleaf was educated at Harvard University. 
Secretary of State Rice and First Lady Laura Bush attended her inauguration. Since her 
election, the political situation has been stable. The Liberian Government has taken 
action to spur economic recovery and taken a public stance against corruption.  
 
 Despite political advances since 2005, Liberia has a high crime rate, and very 
high unemployment. Police are ill-equipped and often ineffective. Petty corruption is 
widespread. Prison conditions are harsh. Arrests and detentions are arbitrary. The 
Liberian Government restricts the press. Child and spousal abuse, rape, human 
trafficking, child labor, and abuses are somewhat common. Security officials 
occasionally harass journalists.  
 
 The United States is a strong supporter of Liberia’s reconstruction efforts and 
continued democratization. Since 2006, the United States has given more than $1 
billion in bilateral aid to Liberia, and the United States leads efforts to reconstitute 
Liberia’s armed forces. President George Bush and later Secretary of State Clinton 
have met with President Sirleaf to discuss issues of mutual interest.  
 
 The Office of National Counterintelligence Executive did not include Liberia in the 
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 
and Liberia is not included on the Department of State’s list of state sponsors of 
terrorism.  
 
 
  
 
7 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
8 
 
                                           
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). The DOHA 
Appeal Board may reverse the administrative judge’s “decision to grant, deny, or revoke 
a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.” ISCR Case No. 07-
16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.).3 The 
federal courts generally limit appeals to whether or not the agency complied with its own 
regulations.   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline B (foreign influence) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
3See ISCR Case No. 09-03773 at 7 n. 4-6 (A.J. Jan. 29, 2010)(discussing appellate standards of 
review). 
 
 
9 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s communications with her family members living in Liberia and 
Ethiopia, except for her father, are not frequent. She is not close to her step-mother, her 
step-brothers, cousins, aunts, uncles, and step-sisters living in Ethiopia or Liberia. 
However, she is close to her father and frequently communicates with him. “[T]here is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant’s relationship with her father 
is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Her relationship with her father creates a concern 
about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and her 
desire to help her father who is in Ethiopia. For example, if criminals in Ethiopia, or the 
Liberian Government wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on 
her father. Applicant would then be subject to potential, indirect coercion through her 
father’s relationship with her. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Ethiopia 
or Liberia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Liberia and Ethiopia with the United States places a 
moderate burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her direct relationship 
with her father does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and 
a desire to assist her father, who might be coerced through his relationship to Liberia or 
Ethiopia.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
 
10 
 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Ethiopia or Liberia 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, her 
father, or any other relatives, it is not possible to absolutely rule out such a possibility in 
the future. Applicant’s communications with her father are frequent, and she evidently 
continues to feel an obligation and an emotional tie to him. Applicant’s concern for the 
welfare of her father is a positive character trait that increases her trustworthiness; 
however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign influence. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
11 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant received a Liberian 
passport in 1987 and in 2004. She used her Liberian passport in 1986, 1989, 1990, and 
1991 to visit several African countries. Applicant has frequent contact with her father, 
and her father has Liberian Government employment. The amount of contacts between 
an Applicant and relatives living in a foreign country are not the only test for determining 
whether someone could be coerced through their relatives. Because of her connections 
to her father, Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [her relationship with her father who is living in Ethiopia and is a citizen of 
Liberia] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” She has emotional ties 
to her father.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S.” She has strong family connections to the United States. Applicant, 
her mother, and her son were all born in the United States and live in the United States. 
She is active in her local community, a member of the Parent Teachers Association at 
her son’s school, and a member of a local church. She has a U.S. passport and votes in 
U.S. national and local elections. She owns her home in the United States. She pays all 
of her taxes. She also has a retirement account and financial accounts in the United 
States.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her family members who 
either live in Ethiopia or Liberia. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the 
Ethiopian or Liberian Governments, or those conducting espionage have approached or 
threatened Applicant or her relatives to coerce Applicant or her relatives for classified or 
sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or 
Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant would have a heavy 
evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is 
important to be mindful of the United States’ recent relationships with Liberia and 
Ethiopia, and especially the human rights violations and crime in those countries.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with her father or other relatives living in Ethiopia or Liberia. 
Applicant is not required to report her contacts with her family members living in 
Ethiopia or Liberia. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited applicability. Applicant has substantial property interests in 
the United States, which include her employment in the United States, and the value of 
her home and investments in the United States. However, this mitigating condition can 
only fully mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), and AG ¶ 7(e) is not raised 
 
12 
 
in this case. Applicant does not own any property or have any investments in Liberia or 
Ethiopia.   
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s close relationship with her 
father, and to a much lesser extent, her relationships with other relatives living in Liberia 
and Ethiopia. Her family members living outside the United States are readily available 
for coercion. The Liberian Government employs her father, which increases security 
concerns. The violations of human rights and crime increase the risk of coercion. 
Multiple factors tend to mitigate concerns. Her father lived in the United States for many 
years and was employed by the United Nations. The absence of any history of Liberia 
and Ethiopia’s espionage (especially industrial espionage) against the United States 
decrease the risk of coercion. Applicant’s significant connections to the United States 
clearly outweigh her connections to Liberia and Ethiopia and are sufficient to mitigate 
security concerns. Guideline B concerns are mitigated by AG ¶ 8(b); however, assuming 
AG ¶ 8(b) is not applicable, security concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-
person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are not 
sufficient to disapprove her access to classified information. Applicant’s father and 
several other relatives are citizens of Liberia and live in Ethiopia. Her father is an 
employee of the Liberian Government. Applicant has frequent contact with her father, 
and has ties of affection to him. She attended high school in Liberia. Applicant received 
Liberian passports in 1987 and in 2004. She used her Liberian passport in 1986, 1989, 
1990, and 1991 to visit several African countries.  
 
 
13 
 
m.       
                                           
There are other facts which warrant mitigation of security concerns. Applicant 
was born in the United States, and has no intention of living in any other country. Two 
witnesses lauded her reliability, trustworthiness, and loyalty. She attended grammar 
school in the United States and earned an LLM degree in the United States. She is 40 
years old and has lived approximately half of her lifetime in the United States. Her 
mother and 10-year-old son are U.S. citizens and live in the United States. She is active 
in her community, votes in U.S. elections, and pays U.S. taxes. She owns a home in the 
United States, and her employment is in the United States. She has a U.S. passport. In 
2004, when her father worked for the Liberian Government, he provided her a Liberian 
passport. She did not request the 2004 Liberian passport, and she never used it. After 
about six months, she returned the 2004 Liberian passport to her father, and he 
destroyed it. She is not a citizen of Liberia, and after leaving Liberia to attend college in 
France, has never used any other benefits from Liberia. If she were a citizen of Liberia, 
she would renounce that citizenship. She has no loyalty to Liberia, and the SOR did not 
allege a concern relating to foreign preference.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Liberia and Ethiopia must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situation in those two countries, as well as the dangers 
existing in Liberia and Ethiopia.4 The danger of coercion from the Liberian and 
Ethiopian Governments is less likely than in many other countries. These two countries 
do not compete with the United States militarily, diplomatically, and through trade. 
Liberia and Ethiopia do not have a history of espionage targeting U.S. military and 
industrial secrets. Liberia and Ethiopia have received billions of dollars of U.S. 
assistance over the last five years, and they cooperate with the United States efforts to 
counter terroris
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. She has never been fired from a job. There is no evidence of record showing 
any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents. She is 
loyal to the United States. She considers the United States to be her home. Applicant’s 
demeanor, sincerity, and honesty at her hearing are important factors militating towards 
approval of her access to classified information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude she has mitigated the 
foreign influence security concern. 
 
 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
