KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Alcohol
DIGEST: While Applicant mitigated security concerns over five of his alcohol-related arrests and
criminal conduct from 1984 to 1998, he failed to mitigate his 2004 DWI conviction as he provided
no evidence that he has completed his two years of probation. While he did attend treatment in 2005
and has made some  positive changes in behavior supportive of sobriety, he did not demonstrate his
ongoing and current commitment to abstain from alcohol.  In addition,  has had at least two relapses
in 2005 and 2006.  Thus, doubt remains over his reform and rehabilitation from his recent criminal
and alcohol-related conduct. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 05-07695.h1
DATE: 09/17/2007
DATE: September 17, 2007
In Re:
---------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-07695
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
KATHRYN MOEN BRAEMAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
       This procedure is required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive1
5220.6, (Directive), as amended.   
       Applicant did receive a copy of the DoD Directive 5220.6, which was sent with his Statement of Reasons2
(SOR).
2
While Applicant mitigated security concerns over five of his alcohol-related arrests and
criminal conduct from 1984 to 1998, he failed to mitigate his 2004 DWI conviction as he provided
no evidence that he has completed his two years of probation. While he did attend treatment in 2005
and has made some  positive changes in behavior supportive of sobriety, he did not demonstrate his
ongoing and current commitment to abstain from alcohol.  In addition,  has had at least two relapses
in 2005 and 2006.  Thus, doubt remains over his reform and rehabilitation from his recent criminal
and alcohol-related conduct. Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
to the Applicant on October 9, 2006.  The SOR detailed reasons why the Government could not
make the preliminary positive finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.   The SOR alleged security concerns in paragraph1
1 over Criminal Conduct (Guideline J) and in paragraph 2 over Alcohol Consumption (Guideline
G) based on the revised (“new”) Adjudicative Guidelines  issued on December 29, 2005, and2
implemented by the Department of Defense, effective September 1, 2006.  Applicant responded to
these SOR allegations in an Answer notarized and dated November 8, 2006, where he admitted all
of the allegations  in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.f., but denied subparagraph 1.e; he
admitted all of the allegations in paragraph 2 and  requested a decision without a hearing. 
On April 30, 2007, Department Counsel, prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM)
which was forwarded to the Applicant on May 1, 2007.  Appliant was advised he had 30 days to
respond to the FORM by submitting any objections or any additional information.  In the FORM,
Department Counsel amended SOR ¶ 1.e. to conform to the evidence:
SOR ¶ 1.e.  In January 1998, you were arrested. . . and charged with public
intoxication.  In March 1998, you were found guilty of public intoxication and were
sentenced to a $25 fine and $40 court cost.
Applicant  received the FORM on May 11, 2007, but he sent no objection to the amendment
nor any response to the FORM, which was due on June 10, 2007.  The matter was assigned to me
on September 10, 2007.  I granted the motion to amend SOR ¶ 1.e. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following Findings of Fact:
  
3
Applicant, 42 years old, has worked as a senior designer for a defense contractor in State #1
from October 1984 to present.  He completed a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) in February
2004 as he is seeking a clearance.  (Exhibit 5) He is a graduate of a community college program.
Applicant is single.  (Exhibit 5)
Criminal Conduct and Alcohol
In February  2004 in response to a question about his police record, Applicant disclosed on
his security form that he had five alcohol-related arrests and convictions in 1984, 1987, 1990, 1996,
and 1998 for either Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) and Drunk in Public where he was fined and/or
had his driver’s license suspended.  (Exhibit 5)  Subsequently, he had another arrest in June 2004.
(Answer; Exhibits 6, 11, 12)   Thus, Applicant has six alcohol-related arrests from 1984 to 2004:
•  Applicant was arrested for Public Drunkenness in April 1984 and fined.  (Answer; Exhibit
6) (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
• Applicant was arrested for DWI (First Offense) in December 1987; found guilty, fined, and
driver’s license restriction for one year; ordered to attend alcohol safety action program
(ASAP). (Answer; Exhibit 6)  (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
• Applicant was arrested for DWI (Second Offense) in March 1990, found guilty, fined,
ordered to attend alcohol safety action program (ASAP) and weekly AA meetings. (Answer;
Exhibit 6)  (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
• Applicant was arrested initially for DWI (Third Offense)  in December 1996 which was
dismissed; later he was charged with Reckless Driving and Unreasonable Refusal to Submit
to a Blood or Breath Test; he pleaded guilty and was sentenced in February 1998 to a $1,500
fine ($1,250 suspended), two years probation, and driver’s license suspended for one year.
(Answer; Exhibits 6, 7, 8, 9)  (SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
• Applicant was arrested for Drunk in Public in January 1998; in March 1998 he was found
guilty in absentia and fined $25 and $40 court costs.  (Answer; Exhibits 4, 6, 10)  (SOR ¶
1.e.) 
• Applicant was arrested in June 2004 for Reckless Driving (which was dismissed) and for
DWI; in November 2004 he was found guilty of DWI, sentenced to six months in jail (5
months and 25 days suspended) where he served two days, two years probation, and was
fined $750, had a restricted driver’s license for one year, and was ordered to attend an
alcohol safety action program (ASAP) and weekly AA meetings. (Answer; Exhibits 6, 11,
12)  (SOR ¶ 1.f.) 
In his Response to Interrogatories in August 2006, Applicant reported he had completed a
treatment program at a counseling center in July 2005 and achieved 26 weeks of sobriety.  At that
time he did not intend to drink in the future and was not then drinking alcohol.  He had sought help
by attending alcoholics anonymous (AA) meetings; for a period he attended meeting and then quit.
4
However, after he quit attending AA meetings, he had a relapse in December 2005.  He was last
intoxicated in July 2006 where he had 36 beers over the course of a weekend.  He now attends AA
again and participates in most of the meetings but has not “worked the program” like he should.  In
the past he did not work the 12 steps, did not get a home group with a sponsor, and did not do
service work.  He intends to work the program one day at a time to acquire more sobriety, but he
admitted “I can’t guarantee that I won’t ever drink again.”  (Exhibit 6)  
After receiving the FORM in May 2007, Applicant provided no supplemental or updated
information on the status of his sobriety or involvement with AA or a similar program.
Except for a couple of safety violations when he was in the apprentice school from 1997 to
1990, Applicant reported that he has had an impeccable personnel and attendance record in his 22
years with his employer.  (Exhibit 6)  He provided no work or community references nor
supplemental information on the status of his employment.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider in evaluating an
individual's security eligibility.  The guidelines are divided into conditions that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying and conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  In deciding
whether to grant or continue an individual's access to classified information, an administrative judge
weighs the relevant revised Adjudication Guidelines and considers the evidence as a whole.  
 The responsibility for producing evidence initially falls on the Government to demonstrate
that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's access to
classified information.  Then, the Applicant presents evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate in order  to overcome the doubts raised by the Government and to demonstrate persuasively
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue the clearance.  
Under the provisions of Executive Order 10865, as amended, and the Directive, a decision
to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only after an affirmative finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. In reaching the fair and impartial overall
common sense determination, the Administrative Judge may draw only those inferences and
conclusions that have a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides industrial security clearance
decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not
necessarily a determination as to the allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism of an applicant. An applicant
must  meet the guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing
a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
       ¶ 31. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: (a) a single3
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (d) individual is currently on parole or probation.
       ¶ 32. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: (a) so much time has elapsed since4
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; (b) the person was
pressured or coerced into committing the act and those pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation;
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution,
job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement. 
5
¶ 30.  The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The government established security concerns under criminal conduct  over misdemeanor3
alcohol-related  charges and convictions from 1984 to June 2004 ¶ 1.a. through ¶ 1.f.).
Disqualifying conditions include: ¶ 31.(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, and ¶
31.(d), individual is currently on parole or probation.  He did not provide any evidence that he
completed his two years of probation required after the November 2004 finding of guilt for his June
2004 DUI. 
 Overall Applicant provided insufficient evidence of mitigation.  While Applicant’s earlier4
criminal conduct from 1984 to1998 can be mitigated under MC ¶ 32.(a) as so much time has
elapsed, his 2004 arrest and conviction reflect a repeated and recurrent problem; therefore, security
concerns persist over that recent 2004 conviction.  Also, Applicant failed to demonstrate successful
rehabilitation under MC ¶ 32.(d).  While it has been three years without any evidence of recurrence
of any criminal activity since his 2004 DWI arrest, he admitted two alcohol relapses: a relapse in
December 2005 (¶ 2.g.) and a relapse in July 2006 (¶ 2.h.).  While he confirmed he returned to AA
in August 2006, he failed to provide evidence of his current abstinence from alcohol as an indicator
he will not re-offend, nor did he provide evidence that he has completed his time on probation from
the last arrest in 2004.  Also, in considering ¶ 32(d), Applicant provided insufficient evidence of
successful rehabilitation, such as constructive community involvement.  While he stated he has a
fine employment record, that by itself is insufficient to mitigate.  He failed to demonstrate his
ongoing commitment to being alcohol free, so security concerns persist. 
Thus, after looking at the whole person and considering the Adjudicative Process factors and
the Adjudicative Guidelines, I rule for Applicant on subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e., but against
Applicant  on subparagraph 1.f. under SOR Paragraph 1.
Guideline G --Alcohol Consumption
¶ 21. The Concern. Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability and trustworthiness.
The Government established security concerns over Applicant’s problem drinking and his
six alcohol-related arrests from 1944 to 2004.  Applicant’s conduct falls within disqualifying
       ¶ 22. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: (a) alcohol-5
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.   (b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty
in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point
of impaired judgment,  regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent. (d) diagnosis by a credentialed medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or
psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence; (e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence
by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; (f)
relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of  an alcohol rehabilitation program;
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
       ¶ 23. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:  (a) so much time has passed, or the6
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to  recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement; (b) the
individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken
to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible
use (if an alcohol abuser); (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or
treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; (d)
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any
required after-care requirements, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption
or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics
Anonymous or a similar organization, and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified  medical
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment
program.
6
conditions (DC) ¶ 22.   In Applicant’s case the relevant DC are ¶ 22.(a), alcohol-related incidents,5
such as driving under the influence, as discussed above, and ¶ 22. (c), habitual or binge consumption
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  Applicant admitted he was diagnosed with alcohol
dependence and was referred to 26 weeks of treatment in 2005 at an outpatient counseling center.
He also admitted he had stated to a DoD investigator in April 2005 that he had no intent to drink
alcohol in the future.  However, subsequently, he has had two relapses since he completed treatment
in July 2005.  The most recent alcohol-related arrest in June 2004 and relapses in December 2005
and July 2006 illustrate Applicant’s questionable judgment:  Applicant made a decision to stop
attending AA before his relapses.  While he stated he was again attending AA meetings in August
2006, he provided no updated information on his status in 2007.  It his burden to do so.
In sum, even after six alcohol-related arrests, Applicant continued intermittently to drink,
at times to excess.  Even after Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence, he continued to
drink.  Even after treatment and in the face of his own stated desire to stop drinking, he continued
to drink, at times to excess.  Overall, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate these alcohol-
related security concerns.  In light of the seriousness of his repeated arrests over a twenty year period
and his intermittent recent relapses, he provided insufficient evidence to demonstrate that he fulfills
the mitigating conditions.   6
 Notably, under MC  ¶ 23.(a), his 2004 arrest is recent and for periods in 2005 and 2006 he
7
was unable to maintain his own resolve to stop drinking.  Given this recency, he does not meet the
test that “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
Under MC ¶ 23.(b), Applicant has acknowledged issues with alcohol dependence. While he
did comply with the court orders to take an alcohol-awareness class, he did not establish his
abstinence from alcohol in 2007 nor establish that he attends an ongoing individual or group
treatment program. Thus, I conclude he failed to establish MC  ¶ 23.(c), the individual is a current
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous
treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress. He has shown some positive changes in
behavior by his compliance with the court ordered requirements.  On the other hand, he has only a
limited record of abstinence from alcohol, so he has not met the expectations of MC ¶ 23.(d.).  He
has not provided a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified  medical professional or a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  Also, he
provided no provided evidence of ongoing and current participation in meetings of Alcoholics
Anonymous or a similar organization.
After considering the Adjudicative Process factors and the Adjudicative Guidelines, I rule
against Applicant on subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.i. under SOR Paragraph 2.
FORMAL FINDINGS
After reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the Adjudicative Guidelines in
Enclosure 2 and the factors set forth under the Adjudicative Process section, I make the following
formal findings:
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i.: Against Applicant
8
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Kathryn Moen Braeman
Administrative Judge
