FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge failed to place adequate weight on the nature of the Iranian government. 
The Judge ignored his own findings of fact regarding Applicant’s conduct and circumstances. 
Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 05-03279.a1
DATE: 09/20/2007
DATE: September 20, 2007
In Re:
-----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-03279
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jerome H. Gress, Esq.
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
Department Counsel does not appeal the Judge’s findings and conclusions under Guideline C (Foreign1
Preference).  That portion of the Judge’s decision is not at issue here.  
“An immediate family member, or a person to whom the individual has close ties of affection or obligation,2
is a citizen of, or resident or present in, a foreign country,” Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.2.1.
“Conduct which may make the individual vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure by a foreign3
government,” Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.2.6.
Applicant was born   REDACTED                                                                                                                   4
                                                                             Iran became a theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.  The
United States broke off diplomatic relations with Iran following the invasion of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and the
seizure Embassy employees.
Applicant       REDACTED                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                           Iran.
 Applicant’s       REDACTED                                                                                                                          6
                                                                
2
clearance.  On July 28, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline
B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 27, 2007, after the hearing,  Administrative
Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department
Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raises the following issues on appeal :  whether the  Judge erred in1
failing to apply Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FIDC) 1  and 6 ; and whether the Judge2 3
erred in concluding that Applicant had mitigated the government’s security concerns.  
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: REDACTED
Applicant was born in Iran                                                                                  Applicant4
spent his childhood in Iran, but came to the United States                                                                
                         Applicant returned to Iran          He held a position                                                  
                                                             He entered private                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                           5
  
Applicant                                                                    , but retained his Iranian passport       
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                            
“Contact and correspondence with foreign citizens are casual and infrequent” Directive ¶ E3.A2.1.3.3. 7
3
                                                                                                                                                            
                          
Applicant and his wife are dual citizens of Iran and the United States.  Applicant says they
are willing to renounce their Iranian citizenship, but have not done so because                               
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            
Iran is a fundamentalist Islamic republic with a poor human rights record and confrontational
relations with the United States.  Relations are unlikely to improve, given Iran’s efforts to obtain
nuclear weapons, its sponsorship of, support for, and involvement in, international terrorism, and
its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process.    
B.  Discussion
The appeal involves the Judge’s conclusions.
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interest of national security.’” Dep’t
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Department Counsel contends that the Administrative Judge erred in failing to apply FIDC
1 with regard to certain of Applicant’s relatives and FIDC 6 with regard to property seized from
Applicant. Department Counsel’s argument has merit. 
       
The Judge states that the presence of Applicant’s relatives in Iran is not a security concern
because they are not part of Applicant’s immediate family.  Decision at 5.    FIDC 1 does not require
that the relatives be in Applicant’s immediate family, as long as they are persons to whom Applicant
has close ties of affection or obligation.  In this case, Applicant has maintained contact with them
since he left Iran over 25 years ago.  He does not call them in Iran for fear of retribution against
them, but they call him whenever they leave Iran and contact him when they visit the United States.
Characterizing Applicant’s relationship to his relatives as casual and infrequent, the Judge cited
Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition 3.   Decision at 5.  While the record evidence indicates that7
the contacts are infrequent, the totality of the circumstances of Applicant’s contacts with his relatives
cannot be said to be casual.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-24358 at 15-16 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2004).
In this instance, the Judge erred by not applying FIDC 1, and by favorably applying FIMC 3.
“Foreign financial interests are minimal and not sufficient to affect the individual’s security responsibilities”8
Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.5.
4
REDACTED
                                                                                                                             In that regard, the
Judge referred to FIMC 5 , but did not actually apply it.  Decision at 6.  As Department Counsel8
points out, the issue is not whether Applicant                                                                   ; the issue
is whether Applicant’s conduct and circumstances                                    have placed him in a
position where he may be vulnerable to foreign influence or coercion.  Department Counsel therefore
argues that FIDC 6 is applicable.  That argument has merit.  
By his                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                            
                                That conduct puts Applicant in a position of vulnerability to be influenced by
the Iranian government by either coercive or non-coercive means.  This is true whether or not the
government has attempted in the past to exploit that vulnerability.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.00-0628
at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2003).   
In concluding that Applicant’s                                                              Iran were not of security
significance, the Judge failed to place adequate weight on the nature of the Iranian government.
Although the Adjudicative Guidelines pertaining to Guideline B are ostensibly neutral as to the
character of the country involved, they should not be construed to ignore the political/security profile
of the country vis-a-vis the United States.  See, e.g., ISCR. Case No. 00-0317 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar.
29, 2002).  In this case, the Judge found that Iran is hostile to the United States and has been
identified as a state sponsor of terrorism.  He also found that Iran is making efforts to obtain weapons
of mass destruction and has a poor record on human rights.  Yet the Judge’s conclusion regarding
the security significance of Applicant’s                                      ignores his own findings with regard
to the nature of the Iranian regime and the significance of its prior treatment of Applicant and his
family and the fear of surveillance on the part of his family.  Such factors are “. . . important
evidence that provides context for all the other evidence of record and must by brought to bear on
the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.”  See ISCR Case No. 04-02511 at 5 (Mar. 20, 2007),
quoting ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006). 
The record in this case indicates that some of Applicant’s relatives are afraid to speak to
Applicant by phone within Iran because they believe that their telephone lines are tapped and that
they will be mistreated if their relationship with Applicant is documented.  Other relatives of
Applicant within Iran have denied any knowledge of him because they fear government retribution.
Transcript at 49.  The Iranian government is aware                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                              Applicant                              
                                                                                                                                                            
   Iran.  
The Judge’s analysis of the security significance of Applicant’s situation is unsustainable
because it fails to consider an important aspect of the case, fails to articulate a satisfactory
explanation for its conclusions, and offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the
5
 record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-02511 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007); see also Motor
Vehicles Mfrs. Ass’n, 463 U.S. at 43.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
    
