FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Upon receipt of the File of Relevant Material, Applicant had the burden of submitting
a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation or explanation
as appropriate.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 05-06913.a1
DATE: 09/18/2007
DATE: September 18, 2007
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-06913
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.j, and 3.a.  Those1
favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
clearance.  On January 9, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be
decided upon the written record.  On March 26, 2007, after considering the record,  Administrative
Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the Judge erred in concluding that Applicant had deliberately falsified his security clearance
application; whether the Judge erred by concluding that the security concerns raised under
Guidelines F, J and E had not been mitigated.1
(1) On appeal, Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because
the credit report submitted by the government was dated and the favorable information in the
evidentiary file was not considered by the Judge.  The  Board construes Applicant’s argument as
raising the issue of whether he received due process. 
After reviewing the record in this case, the Board concludes that Applicant was reasonably
provided with the procedural rights set forth in Executive Order 10865 and the Directive, and that
the Judge evaluated his case in a professional manner, consistent with her role as an impartial
presiding official.  Applicant elected to have his case decided upon the written record.  Upon receipt
of the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), Applicant had the burden of “. . .
submit[ting] a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or
explanation, as appropriate.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  He in fact submitted a response that included
multiple documentary exhibits.  
A close reading of the Judge’s decision indicates that the Judge read, considered and cited
to the evidence Applicant relies on for his Appeal.  The Judge specifically cited to the January 2007
credit report.
(2) Applicant contends that he did not deliberately falsify his 2004 security clearance
application by failing to disclose nine debts that were delinquent for over 90 or 180 days and a prior
criminal charge.  In support of this contention, he argues that the government was aware of the
information in question from record checks, previous background investigations, or because it had
been provided at some point during the current investigation.  Applicant’s argument does not
demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  Given the record in this case, the Judge’s findings of deliberate
Along with his brief, Applicant attaches some items of documentary evidence.  The Board may not consider2
new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
3
falsification are sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Jan. 26, 2006).
(3) Applicant argues that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns raised
under Guidelines F, J and E had not been mitigated, in that she gave insufficient weight to the
favorable evidence in the record, including the facts that his debts had resulted from a previous 
divorce and he had retained a credit counselor, and his excellent job performance and military
service.    Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.2
The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to
properly handle classified information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.  See
Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative security
implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0123 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2000).  The Directive's
Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which are of
security concern to the government and mandate a whole-person analysis to determine an applicant's
clearance eligibility.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace. See ISCR Case No.
03-11231 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2004).
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person
factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-01181 at 3-4 (App. Bd.
Jan. 30, 2004). 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  She found in favor of the Applicant with
respect to a number of the factual allegations.  However, she reasonably explained why the evidence
which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all of the
government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
4
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).
Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guidelines F, J and E is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant access to classified information is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple        
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
