FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had been discharged in bankruptcy
in 2001 but afterward ran up further significant debt.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-12836.a1
DATE: 09/18/2007
DATE: September 18, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-12836
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 28, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On March 19, 2007, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
We construe Applicant’s appeal as alleging that the Judge’s adverse security clearance
decision was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Applicant’s brief and attachments include
new matters not submitted in his response to the File of Relevant Material.  Finding no error, we
affirm.
The Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had been discharged in bankruptcy in
2001 but afterward ran up further significant debt.  While some of these debts had been paid off at
the time of the Judge’s decision, the Judge concluded that, on the whole, Applicant’s financial
history evidenced “carelessness, irresponsibility, and poor judgement.”  The Judge further concluded
that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion that he should have a security clearance.  We
have examined the Judge’s decision in light of Applicant’s brief on appeal and the record as a whole
and conclude that it is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.  We cannot consider the new
matters which Applicant has submitted in support of his appeal.  See Directive ¶  E3.1.29; ISCR
Case No. 04-11369 at 1-2 (App. Bd. Mar. 16, 2007). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffery D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
