KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board notes the paucity of record evidence in the case, especially in support of
Applicant’s position.  His presentation consists principally of promises of future good conduct
which are less probative than actual record evidence.  Given the Judge’s own conclusions that
Applicant had an “intent to deceive” and committed “egregious and serious” conduct, such
uncorroborated promises do not support a conclusion that Applicant has met his burden of
persuasion.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 05-16046.a1
DATE: 09/18/2007
DATE: September 18, 2007
In Re:
-----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-16046
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Directive ¶ E2,A5.1.3.5.  “The individual has taken positive steps to significantly reduce or eliminate1
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress...” 
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 28, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On January 29, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean granted Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in
applying Guideline E Mitigating Condition (PCMC) 5 ; and whether the Judge erred in his whole1
person analysis.  Finding error, we reverse.  
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  In June 2002, while on a business
trip for a former employer, Applicant became intoxicated and left his hotel room in his underwear.
He was arrested for, and convicted of, “open lewdness,” a misdemeanor offense.  After the offense,
but prior to the conviction, Applicant attended alcohol counseling and Alcoholics Anonymous
meetings.  This is the only criminal or alcohol-related offense by Applicant.
“Applicant never completed a security clearance application until he completed one for the
defense contractor in January 2005.  In a moment of quick indecision and haste, he answered ‘NO’
to question 24 asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of an offense related to alcohol
or drugs.  Applicant also answered ‘NO’ to question 30 asking if in the last seven years the use of
alcoholic beverages resulted in any alcohol- related treatment or counseling.  Applicant deliberately
responded ‘NO’ to both questions even though he knew he had been convicted of an alcohol-related
offense and received alcohol-related counseling or treatment.  He was embarrassed by the incident
and did not want his company to learn of it, since it may affect his job.  His wife, son, and family
physician know of the incident.  He does not believe he can be blackmailed about the offense since
his family, the people that mean the most to him, know of the incident.”  Decision at 3.
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”
Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s findings from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1. 
3
Department Counsel does not challenge the Judge’s findings, adopting them for purposes of
his brief on appeal.  Therefore, the Judge’s findings are not at issue in this case, and we rely upon
them in deciding the issues raised by Department Counsel.  See ISCR Case No. 03-11765 at 3 (App.
Bd. Apr. 11, 2005).   
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.”  Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any
appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3
(App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006). 
 Regarding the first issue, the Judge apparently concluded that PCMC 5 had some pertinence
to Applicant’s case, insofar as those closest to him are aware of the underlying misconduct for which
he was convicted, thereby reducing his vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress on that
account.  Decision at 5.  However, the Judge explicitly stated that no mitigating conditions per se
would excuse Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance questionnaire.  Decision at 6.
Department Counsel’s argument that the Judge sought to clear Applicant on the basis of PCMC 5,
therefore, appears to rest upon a misreading of the Judge’s decision.  We resolve the first issue
adversely to the Government.  
The crucial issue in this case is the second one on appeal, whether the Judge’s whole person
analysis is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  We acknowledge that the circumstances of
Applicant’s single arrest were not of sufficient security concern to serve as an independent basis for
Concerning Guideline G, the incident was not part of a pattern.  See Directive ¶  E2A7.1.3.1.   It occurred a2
number of years prior to the issuances of the SOR.  See Directive ¶  E2.A7.1.3.2.  Applicant’s subsequent behavior with
alcohol indicates rehabilitation.  See Directive ¶  E2.A7.1.3.3.   As regards Guideline J, it was neither a “single serious
crime” nor were there “multiple lesser offenses.”  See Directive ¶ E2.A10.1.2.2.  There was no pattern of criminal
activity.  See Directive ¶ E2.A10.1.1.  The offense was an isolated incident that was not recent.  See Directive ¶¶
E2.A10.1.3.1 and E2.A10.1.3.2.
Question by Department Counsel: So you understand the concern that . . . if you’re not answering questions3
truthfully on . . . the security clearance application and you become involved in a mishandling of classified information,
there’s a need to go and report that, although that could be embarrassing?
Applicant: Yes, I understand.
Question: . . . what can you tell the Judge that would lead him to conclude that you could properly handle that,
in spite of the fact that you falsified your security clearance application?
Applicant: . . . I’ve learned a lot . . . about this process, and I’ve also learned a lot about the seriousness of the
whole Defense effort.  Not to make light, but I did work in the commercial steel industry, which is totally different . .
. [a]nd having jumped immediately into a Defense position . . . I understand the seriousness and I would fully . . . divulge
any information in the future that’s required.  Tr. at 17-18.  
Applicant: “I looked at [the question] and I went, “Oh.  Uh, gee.  I’d better say no, because if I don’t, I’ll - you4
know - I’ll lose my job or I won’t get a security clearance.’” Tr. at 22.
4
denying Applicant a clearance under Guidelines G or J.   We also acknowledge Applicant’s2
testimony that he would divulge any required information in the future.    3
On the other hand, the Board notes the paucity of record evidence in this case, especially in
support of Applicant’s position.  His presentation consists principally of promises of future good
conduct, which  are less probative than actual record evidence.  See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 02-29884
at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 16, 2006); ISCR Case No. 02-31872 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2005); ISCR Case
No. 03-14542 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02097 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 17,
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-24743 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 15, 2004).  In this case the Judge’s sustainable
findings and the relatively slender record establish that Applicant was a person of mature years at
the time of the falsification; he committed the falsification relatively recently with respect to his
current SCA; and the falsification was for the purposes of protecting his job and obtaining a
clearance.   The Judge himself concluded that Applicant’s falsification was done “with an intent to4
deceive” and  characterized it as “egregious and serious.”  Decision at 5-6.  Given this record
evidence, and weighing that evidence against Applicant’s uncorroborated promise of future good
behavior, the record does not support the conclusion that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion
that it is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security” for him to have a security
clearance.  Egan, 484 U.S. at 528.  We conclude that the Judge’s favorable security clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  
5
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
