KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s adverse conclusion bear a rational relationship to his unchallenged
findings of fact regarding the extent of Applicant’s tax indebtedness and minimal payments
thereon. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-14853.a1
DATE: 09/24/2007
DATE: September 24, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-14853
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Eric A. Eisen, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 14, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On March 30, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W.
Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in failing to mitigate
the Guideline F security concerns raised in the SOR; and whether the Judge’s whole person analysis
is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  Applicant, 68 years old at the close
of the record, filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 1982, and was released from his
dischargeable debts the same year.  Applicant subsequently invested in a company that contracts with
the DoD, owning 51% of the stock.  The company filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy due to having lost
a bid for a contract.  In the 1990s, Applicant’s company won a bid to manufacture items for the DoD
but suffered a cash flow problem, resulting in the reopening of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
As a consequence of these financial problems, the company stopped paying its own federal taxes and
the tax withholdings of its employees.  As president and stockholder of the company, Applicant is
personally liable to the IRS for approximately $1,105,000.  Applicant’s company remains in Chapter
11 bankruptcy.  Applicant lives frugally, his income consisting of a small salary from his company
and social security payments.  Applicant and his company are currently negotiating offers in
compromise with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  Applicant submitted evidence to the effect
that he is a person of the highest character, integrity, and trustworthiness.
Applicant has not challenged the Judge’s findings.  Therefore, they are not at issue in this
appeal.  See ISCR Case 04-11369 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 16, 2007).  
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.”   Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any
appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3
(App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
While acknowledging the extent of his debt, Applicant contends that any security concerns
associated with it are mitigated.  For example, Applicant argues that the basis for the debt, business
Directive ¶  E2.A6.1.3.3.1
Directive ¶  E2.A6.1.3.2.2
Directive ¶ E2.A6.1.3.1.3
The Judge also concluded that Applicant’s debt to the IRS was recent and that it was not isolated.  This is4
consistent with the ongoing nature of a federal tax debt, which is not extinguished by bankruptcy.  See ISCR Case No.
02-31406 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2006) (“In this case, the Administrative Judge found that Applicant had a history of not
meeting financial obligations which extended over many years.  He had only recently resolved many of his debts and at
the time the case was submitted for decision still had significant outstanding debts.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge
could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent, not isolated, and still ongoing.”)   
3
misfortune, was beyond his control,  was isolated,  and not recent.   The gravamen of Applicant’s1 2 3
brief on appeal, however, is that he is a mature man of high integrity who will not act to the
detriment of his country, even if tempted by promises to pay off his debt.  Applicant cites to a
number of Hearing Office cases which he believes are consistent with granting him a clearance.  
We have considered Applicant’s brief in light of the Judge’s decision and the record as a
whole.  While the Judge acknowledged the centrality of Applicant’s business downturn to his
financial problems, he nevertheless concluded that Applicant’s tax debt is, to an extent, within his
control.  “Applicant’s company was obligated to withhold funds from the employees’ wages for their
federal income tax.  The company did not fulfill the further obligation to pay that money to the IRS.
The company chose to utilize money owed to the U.S. Government in an attempt to save a
floundering company.  That is not a valid business decision.”  Decision at 7.  The Judge went on to
observe that Applicant’s payments to the IRS “have been minimal compared with the amount of the
debts.”  Id.  The Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of persuasion that the
security concerns in his case had been mitigated.   This conclusion bears a rational relation to the4
Judge’s unchallenged findings.  Therefore, we conclude that the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating
conditions is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.  
As far as the Judge’s whole person analysis is concerned, he gave explicit consideration to
Applicant’s professional accomplishments and his “impeccable character evidence.”  Id.  He
balanced that against the extent of Applicant’s tax debt, concluding that it “raises his potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  Id.  We conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis
complies with the requirements of Directive  ¶  E2.2.1, in that he considered the totality of
Applicant’s conduct in reaching his decision.  See ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 6 (App. Bd. May 19,
2006).
The Board gives due consideration to the Hearing Office cases which Applicant has
submitted in his appeal brief.  However, such decisions are binding neither on Hearing Office Judges
or on the Board.  See ISCR Case No. 03-26115 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 5, 2007).  
Order
4
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
