KEYWORD: Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant had a history of alcohol abuse. She did not have any alcohol-
related incidents involving civil authorities. She self-referred for alcohol counseling
and treatment. She received outpatient alcohol treatment. Following a relapse, she
immediately self-referred for treatment. She regularly attends Alcoholics
Anonymous meetings and does not consume any alcohol. She is committed to a life
of sobriety and has demonstrated a lifestyle change consistent with that commitment.
Her alcohol consumption security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 05-10400.h1
DATE: 09/14/2007
DATE:  September 14, 2007
In Re:
------------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-10400
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROBERT J. TUIDER
APPEARANCES
FO R  G O V ER N M E N T
R ichard  A . S tevens , Esq.,  D epartm ent C ounsel
FO R  APPL IC A N T
Pro  Se
SYNOPSIS 
G overnmen t E xhib i t  (G E )  1  (S tanda rd  Fo rm (SF)  86 ,  S ec ur ity  C lea rance  App lica tion )  is  da ted1
a nd  s igne d  M a rc h 8 ,  2 0 0 4 .
O n A ugus t 30 ,  20 0 6 ,  the  U nd er  S e c re ta ry o f  D efense  (In te l l igence)  p ub lished  a  m em o randum2
d irec t ing  ap p lica t io n  of  rev ised  A d jud ica tive  G uid e l ines  to  a l l  ad jud ica tio ns  and  o ther  de te rmina t io ns
m ad e  und er  the  D irec t ive  and  D ep artm ent  o f  D efense  (D o D ) Regula t ion  52 0 0 .2 -R ,  P erso n n e l  Secu ri ty
P ro g ra m  (R egula tion ) ,  da ted  Janua ry 198 7 ,  a s  amended ,  in  wh ich  the  SO R  was issued  on  o r  a f te r
Sep temb er  1 ,  200 6 .  T he  rev ised  Ad jud ica tive  G u ide l ines a re  app licab le  to  A pp licant’s  case .
Applicant had a history of alcohol abuse. She did not have any alcohol-related
incidents involving civil authorities. She self-referred for alcohol counseling and
treatment. She received outpatient alcohol treatment. Following a relapse, she
immediately self-referred for treatment. She regularly attends Alcoholics
Anonymous meetings and does not consume any alcohol. She is committed to a life
of sobriety and has demonstrated a lifestyle change consistent with that commitment.
Her alcohol consumption security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 8, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF
86).  On February 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)1
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.  2
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption).
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked.
In an answer notarized on April 6, 2007, and received at DOHA on April 10,
2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to have her case
decided at a hearing. On April 30, 2007,  the case was assigned to me. On May 21,
2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for June 27, 2007. On
July 10, 2007, DOHA received the transcript (Tr.).  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
As to the concerns identified under Guideline G, Applicant admitted with
explanation the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings
of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following additional findings of fact.  
G E  1 ,  sup ra  n .  1 ,  is  the  basis  fo r  the  fac ts  in  this  p a ragrap h ,  un less  o the rw ise  s ta ted .  3
Applicant is 55 years old. She received a bachelor of science degree in3 
organization management in June 1995.  Tr. 140-141. She also received a master’s
degree in January 2002 in organizational management.  Tr. 141. She has no military
service. Applicant has been employed by a government contractor since January
2004, and her current job title is quality assurance manager.  Tr. 142. She is
unmarried, and does not have any children. Applicant was married from September
1980 to April 2000.  That marriage ended by divorce.  Applicant is a first-time
applicant for a security clearance.
Throughout her hearing, I found Applicant to be credible and forthright. She
confirmed her previous admissions and provided substantial information about her
history with alcohol and her life as an alcoholic and what she has done overcome her
disease. In the late 1980s, Applicant experienced several emotional setbacks that
triggered an impulse or a need to self-medicate and use alcohol to excess.  Her
drinking became exacerbated following the pending breakup of her marriage when
she and her husband separated in June 1996; loss of family members to include her
stepfather in September 1987, her father-in-law in December 1987, her grandmother
in July 1988, and her mother in July 1989; relocating to live near her husband’s large
family in December 1990, which resulted in friction with her husband; losing her
home in 1998; and being laid off from her job. 
The loss of her home, being laid off, and her final divorce decree all occurred
with a one-week period. She self-referred to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) when she
realized her drinking was getting out of hand.  She attended two outpatient alcohol
treatment programs in 1999. The first was from January 1998 to May 1999 and the
second was from June 1999 to July 1999. In both programs, she was diagnosed as
alcohol dependent. All of her alcohol-related treatment was as the result of self-
referral.  
From August 1999 to September 1999, she attended counseling with a licensed
clinical social worker for alcohol dependence and depression. From October 1999 to
June 2004, she attended counseling on an occasional basis with a licensed social
worker for alcohol abuse. In conjunction with her response to DOHA interrogatories,
she provided a letter from a psychologist, who is also a licensed independent clinical
social worker. The letter stated among other things that Applicant “plans to continue
working with her AA sponsor and to attend AA meetings regularly, approximately
one a week.” She described Applicant’s prognosis as “good, contingent upon
continued treatment. She recommended Applicant for a security clearance and “[did]
not believe her past behavior would cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness,
good professional judgment, or ability to safeguard classified national security
information or material.” GE 4.    
She admits to having a relapse in August 2006 where she drank a six pack of
beer over a two-day period and to drinking two beers on December 25, 2006. She
denied seeing a medical doctor for diagnosed condition as alleged in ¶ 1.e. She
denied continuing to consume alcohol as alleged in ¶ 1.f, but rather to drinking two
beers on Christmas Day. She denied as of August 2006 to drinking alcohol once
every six months, but rather to drinking one six pack of beer in August 2006 over a
two-day period. The government did not rebut her assertions.  
  She has three AA sponsors, and maintains contact with them.  One lives out
of state and the other two live near her. Her AA attendance is current, and she has
not consumed alcohol since December 2006. Her current treatment program consists
of attending AA meeting and maintaining contact with her sponsors, and lists her
prognosis as good. 
Applicant submitted numerous reference letters that confirm she is a solid
employee, is professionally accomplished, has a superb reputation, maintains a
strong and very engaged support group, is a homeowner and has outside interests.
GE 4, AE A through JJ. Numerous individuals stated Applicant is trustworthy and
recommended her for a security clearance. None of these documents contained any
derogatory information. Applicant is determined never to use alcohol again. She is
reliable and trustworthy and is highly motivated to remain sober. 
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge
must consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access
to Classified Information” (Guidelines), which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions
(MC), which are used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information.
These Guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these
Guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
Guidelines ¶ 2. An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. Because the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept,” an
administrative judge should consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
Guidelines ¶ 2(c).
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative
process factors listed at Guidelines ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence.”
 “Subs tan tia l  evidence  [ is ]  such re levan t evidence  a s  a  reasonab le  mind  might   accep t  a s4
a d eq ua te  to  sup p o r t  a  co nc lus io n  in  l igh t  o f a l l  the  c o ntra ry ev id e nc e  in  the  re co rd .”   IS C R  C a se  N o .
04 -11 46 3  a t  2  (A pp .  B d .  Aug . 4 ,  200 6)  (c it ing  D irec tive  ¶  E 3 .1 .32 .1 ) .   “T h is  is  som e th ing le ss  than
the  weigh t  o f  the  ev id ence ,  and  the  p o ssib i l i ty  o f  d rawing  two  inco ns is ten t  co nc lus io ns  from  the
ev idence  do es no t  p reven t  [a  Jud ge’s]  f ind ing  from  be ing  sup p o rted  by sub stan t ia l  ev idence .”
C o n solo  v .  F ed era l  M a r it im e  C o m m ’n ,  38 3  U .S .  60 7 ,  62 0  (19 6 6 ) .   “Sub s tan t ia l  ev id ence”  i s  “m o re
than a  sc in ti l la  bu t le ss  than a  p reponderance .”  S ee  v .  W a sh ing ton  M etro .  A rea  Tra n si t  A u th . ,  3 6  F .3 d
3 7 5 ,  38 0  (4  C ir .  19 9 4 ) .t h
“T he  A d m inis tra t ive  Judge  [cons id ers]  the  reco rd  ev id ence  as  a  who le ,  bo th  favo rab le  and5
unfavo rab le ,  eva lua te [s]  Ap p lican t’s  p as t  and  cur ren t  c ircumstances  in  l igh t  o f  p er t inen t  p ro v is io ns
o f the  D irec tive ,  and  de c id e[s]  whe ther  Ap p lican t  ha[s]  met  h is  b urden  o f pe rsuas io n  unde r  D irec tive
¶ E 3 .1 .15 .”   ISC R  C ase  N o .  04 -10 3 4 0  a t  2  (A p p .  B d .  Ju ly 6 ,  20 0 6 ) .  
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration,
the final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information
will be resolved in favor of national security.” Guidelines ¶ 2(b). In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial
evidence.”  The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to4
establish a case which demonstrates, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access
to classified information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of
a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence and
prove a mitigating condition. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 provides, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and
[applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
clearance decision.” The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a
relationship that transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty
hours as well. It is because of this special relationship the government must be able
to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants
access to classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or
in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance,
loyalty, or patriotism. Executive Order 10865, § 7. 
See  ISC R  C ase  N o .  02 -3 1 1 5 4  a t  5  (A p p .  B d . Sep .  22 ,  20 0 5 ) .6
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
Guidelines ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern concerning alcohol
consumption, “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”
Three Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  Guidelines ¶¶ 22(c),
22(e) and 22(f) provide:  
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Applicant did not have any “alcohol-related incidents away from work” or at work.
Applicant was not diagnosed as alcohol dependent by a duly qualified medical
professional as defined by the Directive. No court orders were issued. Guidelines ¶¶
22(a), 22(b), 22(d), and 22(g) do not apply.  
Applicant was straightforward in her responses and accepted responsibility for
her actions. She was diagnosed as alcohol dependent at two separate alcohol
treatment centers in 1999. She admitted to binge drinking during her hearing and
although she had lengthy periods of sobriety, she had several relapses, most recently
in December 2006. After her relapses, she always self-referred for help.The
Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying conditions,
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the
Government.6
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under Guidelines ¶¶ 23(a)-
(d) are potentially applicable: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
See  IS C R  C a se  N o .  0 3 - 0 2 3 7 4  a t  4  (A p p .  B d .  Ja n.  2 6 ,  2 0 0 6 )  (c it ing  IS C R  C a se  N o .  0 2 -2 2 1 7 37
a t 4  (A pp .  B d .  M ay 26 ,  200 4) ) .  W hen mak ing a  recency ana lys is  a ll  deb ts  a re  conside red  a s  a  who le .
  
T he se  tw o  m it iga ting  co nd it io ns  r ec eive  ad d it io na l sup p o r t  in  the  w ho le  p e rso n  ana lys is  p o r t io n8
o f  th is  dec is ion ,  in fra .
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment
and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress;
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption
or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Guidelines ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and
there is no “bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on
my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole,  and because Applicant routinely,7
on multiple occasions consumed excessive amounts of alcohol within two years of
his hearing, I conclude Guidelines ¶ 20(a) with regard to the passage of time does
not apply. She does receive partial credit under this Guideline after her binge
drinking when confronted with the loss of a family member, loss of her job, and
having her divorce become final all within the same week. Guidelines ¶ 20(c) does
not apply because Applicant had a relapse. 
However, she meets all requirements of Guidelines ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) because
she has acknowledged her alcoholism, has changed her life, has abstained from
alcohol use since December 2006, has successfully completed inpatient and
outpatient treatment, has attended hundreds of Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, and
received a favorable prognosis from her psychologist. Applicant presented a strong
case for concluding that alcohol consumption problems are “unlikely to recur.”   8
“Whole Person” Analysis
In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I have
considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to the whole person concept
under Guidelines ¶ 2(a).  As noted above, Applicant’s alcohol consumption was of
sufficient frequency, volume and duration to constitute a security concern. 
The Government produced substantial evidence of three disqualifying
conditions. Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption is a serious, ongoing, long-
term problem. Her alcohol-abuse relapse after out-patient alcohol therapy is
See  IS C R  C ase  N o .  04 -06 2 4 2  a t  2  (A p p .  B d .  June  28 ,  20 0 6 ) .  9
sufficiently serious to raise a security concern. Her alcohol consumption was
knowledgeable and voluntary. She is 55 years old, sufficiently mature to be fully
responsible for his conduct. The motivation to consume alcohol was connected to
depression and stress relief. Excessive alcohol consumption in this manner is not
prudent or responsible, and as such, the potential for exploitation is raised.   
Applicant has presented substantial extenuating and mitigating evidence. She
successfully completed out-patient alcohol treatment in 1999.  She attended
hundreds of Alcoholic Anonymous meetings and had numerous sessions with clinical
psychologists, who had decades of experience treating alcoholism. A psychologist
provided a prognosis supporting sobriety and rehabilitation. She received extensive
alcohol counseling and has religious and AA support. The absence of evidence of
any prior violation of her employer’s rules or requirements, her forthright and candid
statement at her hearing, her solid performance as an employee and his evident
sincerity about making future progress all weigh in her favor. 
There was no evidence of any alcohol-related violations of the law, or
impairment at work. She provided compelling oral and written statements from
friends and co-workers supportive of rehabilitation. In sum, the likelihood of
recurrence is low because sufficient evidence was presented about improvement in
her overall psychological and emotional situation, her solid track of sobriety, and
alcohol counseling.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has mitigated the
security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption.   
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”9
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the
Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the
Guidelines. Applicant has successfully mitigated or overcome the government’s
case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible for access to classified
information.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:         
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a
security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge 
