KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The federal government need not wait for an applicant to mishandle sensitive
information before denying access to such information.  A whole-person analysis is not confined
to the work-place.  The presence of some mitigating information does not compel a favorable
trustworthiness determination.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-12130.a1
DATE: 09/21/2007
DATE: September 21, 2007
In Re:
-------------
 
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-12130
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On August 30, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
2
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided upon the
written record.  On March 19, 2007, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Erin C.
Hogan denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable
trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In her brief, Applicant discusses her financial situation and lists steps she has taken to
improve her financial situation and plans she has made for further financial improvement in the
future.  To the extent that this information is new evidence, the Board cannot consider it on appeal.
See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Applicant also repeats her explanation for her failure to list debts over 180
days past due.  She points out that she has performed her duties faithfully and without compromise
for two years and eight months.  
Prior to the compilation of the File of Relevant Material, Applicant submitted information
concerning her financial situation and her failure to list her financial delinquencies.  This information
was part of the record evidence which was before the Judge when she reached a trustworthiness
determination in Applicant’s case.  There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all
the record evidence, and in this case the Judge discussed the information Applicant provided and
explained why it was insufficient to overcome the government’s trustworthiness concerns.
The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to
properly handle sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.  See
Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative
trustworthiness implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0123 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2000).  The
Directive's Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which
are of trustworthiness concern to the government and mandate a whole-person analysis to determine
an applicant's trustworthiness eligibility.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace.
See ISCR Case No. 03-11231 at 3 (Jun. 4, 2004).
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-
14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  Here, the Judge found some mitigation, but explained why it
was insufficient to overcome the government’s trustworthiness concerns.  An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence
or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the financial considerations and personal conduct allegations had not been mitigated.  Although
3
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, she has not established that those
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years and had deliberately failed to disclose adverse information about
her indebtedness on his Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF-85P).  At the time the case was
submitted for decision, she still had significant outstanding debts.  In light of the foregoing, the
Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun.
29, 2005).  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant
mitigating conditions.  She reasonablyexplained why the evidence Applicant had presented in
mitigation was insufficient to overcome  the government’s trustworthiness concerns.  The Board
does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate
unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is sustainable.  Thus, the Judge
did not err in denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board         
