FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: Trustworthiness determinations are not limited to considerations of on-the-job
performance or conduct during duty hours.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-14707.a1
DATE: 09/10/2007
DATE: September 10, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-14707
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On July 27, 2006,
DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline F.  That finding is not at issue on appeal.1
2
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 28,
2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a
trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness
determination under Guidelines J and E is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness determination should be reversed
because her prior criminal conduct and falsifications have no bearing upon her current
trustworthiness and ability to do her job.  She also argues that the Judge gave insufficient weight
under the whole-person factors to the favorable evidence in the record, particularly her 10 years of
outstanding job performance and the fact that she has acknowledged her prior mistakes.  Applicant’s
arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under
any of its Guidelines and an applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility.  Cf., ISCR Case No. 02-28935
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2005).  The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually
mishandles or fails to properly handle sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to
such information.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-09293 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2007).  Trustworthiness
determinations are not limited to consideration of an applicant's job performance or conduct during
duty hours, and off-duty conduct can be relevant in assessing an applicant's trustworthiness
eligibility. ADP Case No. 06-07581 at 2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2007).  An applicant with good or
exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative trustworthiness implications.
See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-09293 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2007).  The Directive's Guidelines set forth
a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which are of trustworthiness concern
to the government and mandate a whole-person analysis to determine an applicant's trustworthiness
eligibility.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace. Id.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole-person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
3
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  He reasonably explained why the evidence
which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all of the
government’s trustworthiness concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable
record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-07581 at 2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2007). 
Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness
determination under Guidelines J and E is sustainable.
Order
The determination of the Judge denying Applicant access to automated information systems
in ADP I/II/II sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple             
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
