KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1982. He was born, grew up, and was
educated in Taiwan. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. Applicant’s ties of affection
and/or obligation and contacts with his parents and sister who are citizens and residents of Taiwan,
pose an unacceptable security risk. His favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate the foreign
influence security concerns. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-19923.h1
DATE: 09/27/2007
DATE:  September 27, 2007
In re:
------------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-19923
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROBERT J. TUIDER
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1982. He was born, grew up, and was educated
in Taiwan. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. Applicant’s ties of affection and/or
obligation and contacts with his parents and sister who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, pose
an unacceptable security risk. His favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate the foreign
influence security concerns. Clearance is denied.
  See Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960, as amended,1
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Jan.
2, 1992) (Directive), as amended. On August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a
memorandum directing application of revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) to all adjudications and other determinations
made under the Directive in which the SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On December 14, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts and security concerns under Guideline B
(Foreign Influence). The SOR informed Applicant that, based on available information, DOHA
adjudicators could not make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him access to classified information and submitted the case to an
administrative judge for a security determination.  Applicant answered the SOR and requested a1
hearing. DOHA received his answer to the SOR on January 8, 2007. 
The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2007. On May 29, 2007, a Notice of Hearing was
issued convening a hearing on June 20, 2007. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The
government presented two exhibits, marked GE 1 and 2, to support the SOR. Applicant testified on
his own behalf, and presented two exhibits, marked AE A and B. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.)
on June 27, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions are
incorporated herein as findings of facts. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 49-year-old senior systems (software) engineer who has worked for a
Department of Defense (DoD) contractor since February 2004. He was born, raised, and educated
in the Republic of China (Taiwan). In 1979, at age 22, he received a bachelor’s degree in computer
science from a Taiwanese university (Tr. 18). He then served two years of mandatory military service
in the Taiwanese Army. Because of his education, he was assigned as a sergeant in a supply unit. He
claimed he only performed administrative duties and supervised a squad of men. After his discharge,
Applicant worked as a computer programer for a shoe manufacturing company until December 1983
(Tr. 32). 
Applicant met his wife in Taiwan, and they were married in December 1982. She was born
in Taiwan, but had lived in the United States with her siblings since age 15. He and his wife
emigrated to the United States in early 1984. Initially, they lived with his wife’s siblings, who had
emigrated to the United States in 1981 and were legal resident aliens. He and his wife became
naturalized U.S. citizens in 1989. They have two sons, both of whom were born in the United States.
The oldest son was born in March 1984. He works for a pharmaceutical and life science company
conducting research. The young son was born in November 1989. He is a junior in high school.
Applicant has taught his children to be loyal to the United States, and to be involved in their
  I note one of Applicant’s contacts stated in his interview with a government investigator (AE B) that Applicant2
traveled to Taiwan in 2005.
4
community by working as volunteers for the fire department and the rescue squad. His wife has
worked at an elementary school as an administrative assistant for the last eight years (Tr. 50).
In February 1987, Applicant completed a master’s degree in computer science at a U.S.
university (Tr. 36). Since then, he has worked on the east coast of the United States with different
companies, but always in the information technology field (software, and computer programing) (GE
1). In 2004, Applicant started working with his current employer. He was told his Taiwanese
citizenship would adversely affect his ability to receive access to classified information. In December
2004, Applicant renounced his Taiwanse citizenship (AE A). In 2005, he was issued interim access
to classified information by his employer, however, he never handled any classified information (Tr.
98).
He has traveled with his family to Taiwan three times since his arrival to the United States;
in 1991 to celebrate his father’s 70  birthday, in 1999 to visit with his family, and in 2001 toth
celebrate his father’s 80  birthday.  They visited with his family in Taiwan for approximately twoth 2
weeks each time.
Applicant’s mother is 69 years old. She was born in the People’s Republic of China (China)
(Tr. 54). She has been a citizen and resident of Taiwan since around 1949. She lived with Applicant
for many years babysitting his children while he and his wife worked. She used to spend
approximately half of the year in the United States and the other half in Taiwan. In 1990, she became
a permanent resident alien of the United States (Tr. 56). Her husband developed cancer of the vocal
cords and she moved back to Taiwan to take care of him. As of the day of the hearing, she was living
in Taiwan. Applicant claimed that it is not likely his mother will return to the United States because
she is too old, and they don’t have the money for her airplane fare. She has been retired for 17 years.
She used to work for a private company as a telephone operator. According to Applicant, his mother
does not have any relatives in China, except for a sister-in-law with whom she does not have contact.
Applicant has contact with his mother approximately once a week when she is in Taiwan (AE B).
Applicant’s father is 85 years old. He was born in China, but is now a citizen and resident
of Taiwan (Tr. 63). According to Applicant, his father emigrated to Taiwan in 1949 as part of the
Chiang-Kai-shek’s led movement out of China. He served in the Taiwanese Air Force, and was
trained to be a fighter pilot by the U.S. military around 1944. He retired holding the rank of colonel
in 1972. He receives a military pension from the Taiwanese government. After his retirement, he
worked for a private airline company. Applicant testified that all his father’s siblings are dead, and
his father no longer has contact with any members of his family living in China (Tr. 70). Applicant
has contact with his father every two or three years when he visits Taiwan or his father visits the
United States. They have telephone contact once a week.
Applicant has a 47-year-old sister who is a resident and citizen of Taiwan. She is divorced,
has a 13-year-old child, and works as a nurse in a private hospital. She lives with Applicant’s
parents. Applicant has contact with his sister when he calls his parents. He also has a 40-year-old
brother residing on the west coast of the United States, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant
  AG ¶ 2(a). “. . . The adjudication process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole3
person concept. Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should
be considered in reaching a determination. . . .” The whole person concept includes the consideration of “the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; the frequency and recency of the conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the
extent to which participation is voluntary; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes; the motivation for the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence. . .”
5
has telephone contact with his brother once a month, and personal contact every two or three years
(Tr. 75).
Applicant’s mother-in-law was born in China. She resides in the United States with her two
sons and two daughters. To Applicant’s knowledge, all of his siblings in-law and his mother-in-law
are naturalized U.S. citizens (Tr. 76). Applicant’s mother-in-law has visited China several times. The
last time was two years ago when she and two of her children visited China for approximately three
weeks (Tr. 80).
Applicant claimed he has no contact with anyone in Taiwan or China, except for his family.
He has no financial ties or economic interests outside of the United States. He and his wife have
voted in U.S. elections since 1992.
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Taiwan is a stable multi-party democracy,
its government is friendly to the United States, and it has a good human rights record. Since the end
of World War II, Taiwan has developed into a major international trading power and has become the
world's 17th largest economy. There are on-going tensions between Taiwan and China. Taiwan seeks
to become an independent State, an aspiration which is strongly opposed by China, which sees
Taiwan as a province of China. Despite their differences, contact between the two sides has grown
significantly over the last decade. China is Taiwan’s largest trading partner, and Taiwan is China’s
fifth largest. The United States has recognized China as the only legal government of China, and that
Taiwan is part of China. Exs. I through XIII.
Additionally, I take administrative notice of Taiwan's active and historic roles as collector
of competitive information and perpetrator of industrial espionage against U.S. companies producing
militarily critical technologies such as information systems, sensors and lasers, and electronics.
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines (AG) which must be considered in evaluating
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. The administrative judge must take
into account both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each AG applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the case. The guidelines are not viewed as inflexible ironclad rules of law. The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion
for or against an Applicant. Each decision must reflect a fair and impartial common sense
consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive, and the whole person concept.3
Having considered the record evidence as a whole, I conclude Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is the
applicable relevant AG.
  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
  ISCR Case No. 98-0761, at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999)(Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less5
than a preponderance of the evidence); ISCR Case No. 02-12199, at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 2006)(Substantial evidence is
such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the record); Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.
  Egan, supra n.8, at 528, 531.6
  See Id.; AG ¶ 2(b).7
6
BURDEN OF PROOF
The purpose of a security clearance decision is to determine whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary4
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, therefore, has a
compelling interest to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. 
The government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in the
SOR. To meet its burden, the government must establish by substantial evidence  a prima facie case5
that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest for the applicant to have access to classified
information. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the
government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant carries a heavy
burden of persuasion.  The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution6
of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's suitability for access to classified information in favor
of protecting national security.7
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this Decision
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express
or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.  Executive Order 10865,
§ 7. 
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), the government’s concern is that foreign
contacts and interests may be a security concern. If the individual has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, he or she may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including,
but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. AG ¶ 6.
  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,8
2001).
7
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying in this case, including:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion;
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group,
or country by providing that information;
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter
of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country, and
an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for
foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  Applicant8
has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or obligation with his parents and
sister, who are residents and citizens of Taiwan. These contacts create a heightened risk of foreign
pressure or attempted exploitation because there is the possibility that Taiwanese or Chinese agents
may exploit the opportunity to obtain intelligence, classified, or economic information about the
United States. His connection to his family members also create a potential conflict of interest
because his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to help
them or the governments of Taiwan or China by providing sensitive or classified information. 
The government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially disqualifying
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government.
Three foreign influence mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to these
disqualifying conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest; and
  The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they impose. This9
approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level of security concern or threat
it presents to the United States. 
8
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I conclude
that none of the mitigating conditions apply. The evidence shows Applicant has strong feelings of
affection and a strong sense of obligation to his parents and sister. The closeness of the relationship
is shown by Applicant’s telephone contacts with his parents and sister. His travels to Taiwan
underscore his deep feelings of affection and/or obligation to his family. Applicant’s mother’s
travels to the United States to assist Applicant raising his children also indicated the closeness of the
familial relationship. 
In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, I
considered Taiwan’s and China’s forms of government.  Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. Its9
government is friendly to the United States, and has a good human rights record. Notwithstanding
Taiwan’s desire for independence, the United States has recognized China as the only legal
government of China, and that Taiwan is part of China. China is a nuclear power and its government
is a rival of the United States. China is an authoritarian, Communist state with a poor human rights
record. More importantly for security purposes, China aggressively seeks classified and
industrial/economic information from the United States. Chinese agents may attempt to use
Applicant’s family living in Taiwan to obtain such information. Additionally, Taiwan’s historically
active role as a collector of competitive information and perpetrator of industrial espionage against
United States, coupled with Taiwan’s trading interests, and their trading relationship with China,
heighten the security concerns. 
Considering the totality of the circumstances, Applicant did not establish it is unlikely he will
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family and the interests of
the United States. His frequent contacts and close relationship with his family could potentially force
him to choose between the United States and Taiwan. Applicant’s parents are known to the
Taiwanese and Chinese government, because of his status as a retired colonel in the Taiwanese
Army, Applicant’s resignation of his Chinese citizenship in 2004, and his mother-in-law travels to
China. Applicant’s family in Taiwan remains vulnerable. He did not meet his burden of showing
there is little likelihood that his relationship with his family could create a risk for foreign influence
or exploitation.
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and
loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the
United States’ interest. He has lived in the United States for approximately 23 years. He and his wife
are naturalized U.S. citizens, and their two sons were born in the United States. All of his financial
and business interests are in the United States, and he has embraced the American way of life.
Although this mitigating condition is partially applicable, these facts are insufficient to overcome
the security concerns.
I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and mitigating
conditions as listed under the applicable AGs. I specifically considered Applicant’s answers to the
9
SOR, his testimony, his favorable information in his report of investigation (AE B), that he and his
wife have been naturalized U.S. citizens for 18 years, and their sons were born in the United States.
I also considered that there is no evidence that he has ever mishandled or cause the compromise of
classified information. Considering all available information, and the whole person concept, I find
Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concern.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings regarding each SOR allegation as required by Directive
Section E3.1.25 are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.d Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge
