KEYWORD: Drugs; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant's positive drug screening test for amphetamines/methamphetamine in September
2005 and her admitted use of a prescription drug without a prescription in September 2005 raise
security concerns under drug involvement and personal conduct.  Although she denies using
amphetamines/methamphetamine, she provided insufficient evidence to rebut the positive drug
screening test. Applicant's eligibility for a assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
CASENO: 06-20237.h1
DATE: 09/17/2007
DATE:  September 17, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-20237
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ERIN C. HOGAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant's positive drug screening test for amphetamines/methamphetamine in September
2005 and her admitted use of a prescription drug without a prescription in September 2005 raise
security concerns under drug involvement and personal conduct.  Although she denies using
amphetamines/methamphetamine, she provided insufficient evidence to rebut the positive drug
screening test. Applicant's eligibility for a assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; and  Memorandum1
from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Counterintelligence and Security, titled "Adjudication of Trustworthiness
Cases," dated November 19, 2004.
 Tr. at 6; Gov Ex 1.2
 Tr. at 29-30.3
 Gov 3. 4
3
STATEMENT OF CASE
On February 23, 2006, Applicant submitted an application for a position of public trust, an
ADP I/II/III position. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant the
application under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (the "Directive");  and the Revised1
Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on December 29, 2005, effective September 1,
2006. On February 8, 2007,  DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
basis for its decision. The SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleged security
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.
In a sworn statement dated March 9, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on June 20, 2007. It was
transferred to me on August 2, 2007. A notice of hearing was issued on August 6, 2007, scheduling
the hearing for August 29, 2007. The hearing was conducted on that date. The government submitted
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1- 4 which were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified on her own behalf, and submitted five exhibits which were admitted without objection as
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-E. I took administrative notice of a document submitted by the
Government and marked it as Administrative Notice Document I (Admin Not I). DOHA received
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 7, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
In her SOR response, Applicant admits to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, and denies SOR¶¶ 1.b, and
2.a.  Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 23 year old woman employed as a pharmacy technician for a Department of
Defense contractor who is seeking a position of public trust.  She has worked for her employer since
July 2005.  She is a high school graduate.  She attends college part-time studying pre-pharmacy. She2
is married.3
In December 2004, Applicant was hired as a pharmacy technician by another company.  On
September 2, 2005, she provided a urine sample during an employment drug screening. Her urine
sample tested positive for amphetamines and methamphetamine.  She lost her job as a result of the4
 Tr. at 22. 5
 Tr. at 21. 6
 See Admin Not I.7
 Tr. at 21-25.8
 Gov 3. 9
 Tr. at 24-25. 10
 Tr. at 31. 11
 Answer to SOR. 12
 Gov Ex 1.13
 Id. 14
 Tr. at 21-25. 15
4
positive drug test. She denies using amphetamines or methamphetamine prior to her drug screening
test.   She experimented with marijuana and methamphetamine while in high school.5 6
Applicant admits to taking Clonazepam pills, on two occasions in late August 2005.
Clonazepam is a Schedule IV controlled substance.  The pills were prescribed to her mother.  She7
was aware that she should not have taken pills that were prescribed to someone else.  She believes
taking the Clonazepam is what caused her positive drug screening test. She stated that Clonazepam
is an anti-anxiety medication and she took the pills to help her sleep. She states that Clonazepam is
a benzodiazepine which she describes as "sort of like a sedative for the central nervous system."8
The September 2005 drug screening results indicated that Applicant tested negative for
benzodiazepine.  She could not explain why she tested negative for benzodiazepine.  She could not9 10
explain why she tested positive for amphetamines/methamphetamine.  She did not discover that her11
positive drug test was for amphetamines/methamphetamine until she was provided the test results
in conjunction with this case. She would have disputed the positive test results immediately had she
known that the results indicated that she tested positive for amphetamines/methamphetamine.12
On February 23, 2006,  Applicant completed a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85-P).13
In response to question "21a. Illegal Drugs.  In the last year, have you illegally used any controlled
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine,
codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.),
hallucinogenics, (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?" Applicant answered, "yes" and listed
using Clonazepam twice in August 2005.  She did not list amphetamine/methamphetamine use. She14
admits to taking Clonazepam without a prescription but denies taking
amphetamines/methamphetamine.15
 AE A. 16
 AE B.17
 AE C. 18
 Tr. at 31.19
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  20
 Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 24.21
5
Applicant's supervisor states that Applicant is a woman of great integrity who is extremely
dedicated to her work.  She describes her as "dependable, reliable, hard-working and honest." She
has taken a lead role in the department over the past six months and has gained respect from her
peers due to her knowledge and ability.  A co-worker who has worked with Applicant for one year16
and eight months also finds her to be dependable, hard-working, and honest.17
On May 1, 2007, Applicant saw a doctor related to her sleeping problems. She was
diagnosed with insomnia and prescribed medication to treat her condition.  The medication was not
Clonazepam.  18
Applicant works full-time and takes nine hours of classes.  She provided a urine sample for
drug screening in November 2005 when she was hired by her current employer. She assumed the
urine sample was negative because she has never been notified of the results. She testified that she
has no intent to use illegal drugs and/or use prescription medications that are not prescribed to her
in the future.  19
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information.”   In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding20
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining trustworthiness within the
executive branch.  On December 29, 2005, the President approved Revised Adjudicative Guidelines
which became effective on September 1, 2006.
To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an applicant must
meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive and the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines.
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions under each guideline.  The adjudicative
guidelines at issue in this case are: 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement - Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.21
 Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 15.22
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.1.23
 Id.24
 Id.25
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.14.26
 Directive, ¶ E3.1.15.27
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. December 19, 2002).28
 Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.29
6
Guideline E - Personal Conduct - Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.22
Conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines, are set forth
and discussed in the conclusions below.
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”    An23
administrative judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the
available, reliable information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the24
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of
the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness
of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes;
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   25
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,26
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.   An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is27
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”  Any doubt28
as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be
resolved in favor of the national security.  The same rules apply to trustworthiness determinations29
for access to sensitive positions.
CONCLUSIONS
7
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards.
Drug Involvement
Based on all the evidence, Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DI DC) ¶ 25(a) (any
drug abuse), and DI DC ¶ 25(b) (testing positive for illegal drug use) apply to Applicant's case.
Applicant admits to taking Clonazepam, a schedule IV controlled substance, on two occasions in
August 2005.  She had no legal prescription for this drug. In September 2005, she tested positive for
amphetamines/methamphetamine during a drug screening test conducted by her employer.
Applicant has the opportunity to mitigate the concerns. Two of the Drug Involvement
Mitigating Conditions (DI MC) have the potential to apply. DI MC ¶26(a) (the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not
applicable.  Although Applicant's positive drug test and use of Clonazepam happened two years ago
and there is no evidence of subsequent drug use, I cannot apply DI MC ¶ 26(a) because of Applicant's
positive drug test for amphetamines/methamphetaminein September 2005. It was Applicant's burden
to mitigate the concerns raised by the positive drug screenng test. She has not met the burden.
Concerns remain about her trustworthiness and good judgment. 
DI MC ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment
where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) is not applicable. Applicant testified that she has
not used drugs since August 2005 and that she has no intention of using illegal drugs or drugs without
a prescription in the future.  However, a trustworthiness concern remains due to her failure to provide
a sufficient explanation for testing positive for amphetamines/methamphetamine.
Applicant has not met her burden to mitigate the drug involvement trustworthiness concern.
Guideline H is decided against Applicant.
Personal Conduct
 
Personal conduct under Guideline E is always a trustworthiness concern because it asks the
central question if a person's past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly
safeguard classified and/or sensitive information.  Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when applying for a
security clearance or in other official matters is a trustworthiness concern.  It is deliberate if it is done
knowingly and willfully.  
In this case, Applicant did not list using amphetamine/methamphetamine in response to
question 21(a) on her questionnaire for public trust position.  The September 2005 positive drug
screening test result supports the assertion that she used amphetamines/methamphetamine.  Personal
Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, falsification
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
8
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities)
applies.
I find none of the personal conduct mitigating conditions (PC MC) apply to Applicant's case.
PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment,
or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not apply.  While Applicant disclosed
her Clonazepam use, she did not disclose her use of amphetamine/methamphetamine.  She maintains
that she did not use amphetamines/methamphetamine in September 2005.  The positive drug test
indicates otherwise.  Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to challenge the validity of the
test.
PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable.
Although Applicant appears to be a bright young woman, I cannot conclude that the positive drug
test result for amphetamine/methamphetamine is invalid. Her failure to admit and/or disclose her
amphetamine/methamphetamine use on her trustworthiness questionnaire raises questions about her
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.   
PC MC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors
that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur) is not applicable for the reasons mentioned above. 
Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by her
failure to disclose her amphetamine/methamphetamine use on her trustworthiness application.
Guideline E is concluded against Applicant.
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the trustworthy determination process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of
a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for assignment to
sensitive duties. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in
considering the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality
of their acts, omissions, motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own
merits, taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature
thinking, and careful analysis.
I have considered all the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating Applicant’s
trustworthiness. Applicant has a favorable work history with her current job. However, she failed to
meet her burden to mitigate the concerns raised under drug involvement and personal conduct.  A
question remains about Applicant's reliability and trustworthiness due to her inability to explain the
positive test result for amphetamines/methamphetamine in September 2005. Based on the evidence
in the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for
assignment to sensitive duties. Eligibility is denied.
FORMAL FINDINGS
9
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the evidence presented in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties.  Eligibility is denied.
Erin C. Hogan
Administrative Judge
