KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant has a number of listed delinquent debts, most of which are related to medical
cost-shares associated with surgical procedures he underwent between 1999 and 2003.  Only one of
his listed debts does he dispute, and he documents resolving this debt favorably.  With respect to the
remaining listed debts, Applicant has since paid them.  By his demonstrated good-faith efforts in
resolving his lone disputed debts and paying the remaining extenuated ones, Applicant mitigates
security concerns associated with his delinquent debts.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-23607.h1
DATE: 09/26/2007
DATE:  September 26, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23607
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Chester (Skip) Morgan, II, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 2
Applicant has a number of listed delinquent debts, most of which are related to medical cost-
shares associated with surgical procedures he underwent between 1999 and 2003.  Only one of his
listed debts does he dispute, and he documents resolving this debt favorably.  With respect to the
remaining listed debts, Applicant has since paid them.  By his demonstrated good-faith efforts in
resolving his lone disputed debts and paying the remaining extenuated ones, Applicant mitigates
security concerns associated with his delinquent debts.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On May 23, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 19, 2007, and requested a hearing.  The case was
assigned to me on August 14, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on September 11, 2007.  A
hearing was held on September 11, 2007, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security
clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of four  exhibits; Applicant relied on two
witnesses (including himself) and five exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on September
19, 2007.
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record by kept open to afford him
the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments of two of the creditors listed
in the SOR.   For good cause demonstrated, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the
record.  Within the time permitted, Applicant provided documentation of his payments to his medical
creditors and his credit card creditors.  The submissions were admitted without objection and
assigned exhibit numbers F, G and H..
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated 12 delinquent debts exceeding
$10,000.00.  For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but three of the alleged debts and
furnished explanations of the medical problems he encountered that caused him to fall behind with
his debts. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
3
Applicant is a 57-year-old system engineer who seeks to retain his security clearance. The
allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Before 1999, Applicant enjoyed stable employment and debts in current status.  In 1999, he
ruptured three discs and encountered difficulty walking without extreme pain.  He underwent surgery
that year.  Her treating surgeon removed one of the problem discs later that year.  However, this disc
turned out not to be the one that was pushing on his sciatic nerve.  His recovery time from the
surgery was six months, during which time, he could not return to work (R.T., at 21-22).
Because the surgeon removed the wrong disc when he operated on Applicant in 1999,
Applicant’s back pain persisted throughout 1999.  His physician advised him that the two remaining
discs were still pushing against the sciatic nerve, and his lower spine was pressing hard against his
spinal cord and needed to be corrected.  So, in 1999 the physician scheduled Applicant for a second
surgical procedure.  During this operation, the physician nicked the membrane that holds the spinal
fluid and caused leakage of his spinal fluid for several days, and eventually a cerebral hemorrhage
(R.T., at 57-58).  As a result, the physician had to schedule Applicant for a third surgical procedure:
to close and secure the hole that caused the leaking.  Applicant’s recovery period for these additional
surgical procedures was almost a year, during which time he was out of work, and received only a
portion of his regular pay (R.T., at 58-59).  This surgical procedure cost over $100,000.00, of which
his insurance company picked up only 80 per cent of the total cost (R.T., at 58).
To help him with his medical bills during a period of diminished income from his work,
Applicant resorted to using his credit cards to.  Later in 1999, he did receive medical clearance to
return to work on a part time basis, and did so for a short time.  When his company complained that
it could not use his services on a part time basis, Applicant enlisted his treating physician to
authorize his return to full time employment (R.T., at 59).  No sooner did he report to his work site
on a full time basis than his company laid him off.  
Physically limited, Applicant could not find work in 2000 and turned first to his
unemployment insurance.  After exhausting his eight remaining weeks of unemployment entitlement,
Applicant applied for welfare benefits.  Once turned down, he proceeded to exhaust his 401(k) plan
before reapplying for welfare benefits.
During his period of extended recovery and diminished earnings, Applicant was able to keep
up with most of his current debts, but was unable to cover his medical bills and credit cards.  Shortly
after accepting another job in the local area in 2002, he encountered a head-on automobile accident
that broke his back, caused a concussion, and totaled his own automobile.  This accident caused him
to be out of work for almost a year and cease paying on his accumulated medical bills.  Applicant’s
medical bills associated with his 2003 back surgery cost over $200,000.00, of which his insurance
company covered all but 20 per cent, or $20,000.00 (R.T., at 58).  While Applicant did receive
$100,000.00 in settlement from the offending motorist’s insurance company, he netted only about
$20,000.00 from this settlement after expenses and attorneys fees were deducted (R.T., at 61). 
Because of the numerous side effects associated with his 2003 back operation, Applicant
experienced difficulties at work, and was forced to take considerable leave.  After exhausting his sick
leave, the time he took off from work was uncompensated.  This loss of income put additional stress
4
on his debt paying ability.  Altogether, Applicant accumulated some 12 delinquent debts between
1999 and 2005 that until recently he has not been able to regularly address.  
Since returning to work in 2006, Applicant has made steady progress in addressing his
delinquent debts.  He has been aided some in his repayment efforts by a small inheritance his wife
received from her mother’s estate following her mother’s passing in May 2007 (compare ex. 2 with
ex. A; R.T., at 23).  A long disputed debt was reported in Applicant’s May 2007 credit report (ex.
2) and is listed in the SOR as creditor 1.a.  This debt has since been resolved favorably to Applicant
and now reflects a zero balance (see ex. A; R.T., at 25-27). 
Of all the listed debts in the SOR, Applicant disputed the validity of just one of the debts:
creditor 1.a.  He is able to document favorable resolution of this debt (see ex. A; R.T., at 25-26).  To
address the listed medical debts in the SOR (which he acknowledges as his own), Applicant engaged
two consolidation services: BC and CSC.  Through these services, Applicant and his wife are able
to document payment in full of each of the listed medical debts (i.e., creditors 1.c through 1.i)
through two lump sum payments (see exs. B, C, E and H; R.T., at 28-35).  The two credit card
accounts Applicant had with creditors 1.j and 1.k were paid as well.  Payment of the first credit card
account is documented by exhibits D, E and F (R.T., at 35-43).  Payment of the second account
(creditor 1.l) was previously made in July 2006 and is documented by exhibit G (running check
register).
By supplemental submissions, Applicant is able to document his satisfaction of his other
credit card debt (creditor 1.k) with a compromise payment of $1,680.54 and her $422.00 collection
account with creditor 1.l (see ex. F).  He documents payment, too, of his two AH debts covered by
creditors 1.b and 1.d, which in the aggregate total $3,262.00 (see exs. B, C, Gand H; R.T., at 26-27)).
And he clarifies the ambiguity reflected in exhibit C with his corrected payment documentation that
reflects a zero balance following his documented $1,170.06 payment in August 2007 (compare exs.
C with H).
With his documented payments, Applicant has resolved all of her delinquent debts listed in
the SOR and is currently debt free.  He and his wife have no credit cards in delinquent status that
they are aware of.  He currently has $1,610.00 reinvested in his 401(k) account that he can draw on
should a financial emergency arise in the future.
POLICIES
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
"Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying
Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge
to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
5
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may
lead to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do
so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires Administrative
Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.
Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s]
alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a
material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The
required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively
demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified information before it
can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing
his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a system engineer for a defense contractor who accumulated a number of
delinquent debts over a six-year period spanning 1999 and 2005 during periods of unemployment
6
attributable to medical issues. Considered together, and without resolution, Applicant’s
accumulated debts raise security significant concerns.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his prior inability to address these debts warrant
the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for financial
considerations: DC 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and DC 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
For the most part, Applicant’s debts are attributable to (a) the substantial medical outlays
he became obligated to dispense to his medical providers to satisfy the cost-share portions of his
insurance policy and (b) his use of his credit cards to cover his family’s personal needs during
extended periods of time when he was recovering from his recurrent back surgeries and could not
return to work.  
Since returning to work on a full time basis in 2006, Applicant and his wife have made
considerable progress in addressing his delinquent debts.  Aided by his wife’s small inheritance, he
has been able to favorably resolve his one disputed debt and repay all of his other listed creditors
(most of them of a medical nature) through two debt consolidated services he engaged.  Given his
exhibited extenuating circumstances associated with his debilitating back ailments, and the
corresponding medical procedures top correct the identified problems, and the diminished resources
he and his wife had at their disposal to address their debts during related periods of unemployment,
Applicant may rely on MC 20 (b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) of the Guidelines for financial considerations. 
Mitigation credit is also available to Applicant based on his presented repayment proofs.
Applicant is able to demonstrate a credible dispute with one of his listed creditors (i.e., creditor 1.a),
which has since been resolved, and completed repayments with his remaining creditors.  Age of the
debts at issue is covered by one of the mitigating conditions for financial considerations: MC 20(a)
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) has applicability, while not dispositive.  With respect to Applicant’s lone disputed debt,
MC 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the
dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) has applicability. 
While Applicant is not able to document any specific credit counseling, his election to
involve two debt consolidation services to resolve his numerous medical debts reflects positively
on his willingness to explore creative ways to utilize his available resources to resolve his
outstanding debts.  Based on his initiated efforts to date, prospects for his gaining important insights
7
in handling his finances in the future should he be confronted with other medical issues appear to
be promising.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities,
among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial stability in a person
cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the
holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial
difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases (as here).
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt
accumulations and documented steps taken to resolve them, Applicant mitigates security concerns
related to both his disputed debt and his proven debt delinquencies.  Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of the
E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the context of
the FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS, CONDITIONS, and the factors listed above, this
Administrative Judge makes the following FORMAL FINDINGS:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.h: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.i: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.j: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.k: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.l: FOR APPLICANT
 DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  Clearance is granted.
8
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
