KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems. It is too soon to tell if he will
resolve the financial problems in a satisfactory manner. Clearance is denied. 
CASENO: 06-24088.h1
DATE: 09/12/2007
DATE:  September 12, 2007
In re:
----------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24088
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL H. LEONARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems. It is too soon to tell if he will
resolve the financial problems in a satisfactory manner. Clearance is denied. 
 Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended (Directive).
 See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (December
29, 2005). 
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on April
18, 2007. The SOR—which is equivalent to an administrative complaint—details the factual basis
for the action and alleges a security concern under Guideline F for financial considerations based on
delinquent debts. 
In addition to the Directive, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by
the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense
Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or2
amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.
On April 26, 2007, Applicant replied to the SOR and requested a hearing. The hearing took
place as scheduled on August 15, 2007, and the transcript was received on August 28, 2007.
The record was kept open until August 29, 2007, to allow Applicant an opportunity to submit
documentary information about his financial situation, as he did not submit any during the hearing.
To date, he has not submitted post-hearing documentation.  
FINDINGS OF FACT
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges ten delinquent debts for about $17,379 in total.
Applicant admitted eight of the ten debts, and he denied two debts for $759 and $29. In addition to
his admissions, the following facts are established. 
Applicant is a 36-year-old communications technician. He has worked for his current
employer since May 2004. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance for his current employment.
3
From December 1990 to November 1992, Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy.
He did not serve his full enlistment because he was discharged on the grounds of hardship. 
Applicant married in 1990 and divorced in 1995. The marriage did not produce any children.
He has not remarried. Applicant has two children, ages 16 and 18, with the same woman. Paternity
was established many years ago when the children were young. He pays child support of $410 per
month. As far as he knows he is current. He does have a child-support arrearage, however, stemming
from the period before paternity was established. The arrearage balance is about $15,614 (Exhibit
2 at 2). He understands that part of his monthly payment is applied toward the arrearage. 
Concerning his overall financial situation, Applicant’s gross income in 2006 was about
$39,000. After paying rent ($600) and other expenses, he usually has about $200 to $400 left over
each month. He does not have a car payment, and he has a couple of credit-builder credit cards he
is using to reestablish his credit history. Applicant is interested in buying a home and has saved about
$6,000 for that purpose. He met with a mortgage broker who advised him to wait for the old debts
to drop off his credit report.  
Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems. It is established by a December
2006 credit report (Exhibit 2). It forms the basis for the ten debts in the SOR. The status of his
indebtedness is summarized in the following table.
Debt Description Current Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–wireless account in collection for
$1,081.
Unpaid. Says a former employer is
responsible for account. 
SOR ¶ 1.b–medical account in collection for
$759.
Unpaid. Has no recollection of debt.  
SOR ¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e–charged-off credit card
accounts with same bank for $1,289, $2,908,
and $2,129.  
Unpaid.   
SOR ¶ 1.f–charged-off account for $29. Unpaid. Says dropped from his credit report.  
SOR ¶ 1.g–collection account for $982. Unpaid.
SOR ¶ 1.h–collection account for $1,088.
Credit report reflects consumer disputes
account information.
No additional information provided. 
SOR ¶ 1.i–collection account for $931. Unpaid. 
SOR ¶ 1.j–charged-off account for $8,183. Says account is a student loan and he is
making payments. 
Applicant has experienced periodic unemployment. His security-clearance application
reflects two periods of unemployment (Exhibit 1). The first period was November 2002 through
March 2003, and the second period was November 2003 through December 2003. Although not
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plain that thereth
is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
reflected in his application, he was laid off twice for a few months in his current employment (R.
72–73). 
 Applicant did not provide any documentary information about the ten debts in the SOR or
about his overall financial situation. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AND POLICIES
No one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in Department3
of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes any existing security5
clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level and retention of any existing
security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for access
to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting evidence to establish facts7
alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An applicant is responsible for presenting evidence8
to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an9
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan,10
the Supreme Court said that the burden of proof is less than the preponderance of the evidence.  The11
agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are
reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
 MC 2 is “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,18
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
5
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access
to classified information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access
to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met the strict13
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically exists due to14
significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”  Similarly, an individual who is15
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly
handling and safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial problems.
His history of financial problems is a security concern because it indicates inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline16 17
F. The record evidence is more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
The most pertinent mitigating condition is the second MC  of Guideline F. It receives18
consideration because of Applicant’s periodic unemployment dating back to 2002. It does not apply,
however, because the evidence does not show that Applicant satisfied the second clause of the MC
by acting responsibly under the circumstances. He did little or nothing other than accumulating
$6,000 in savings for a down payment on a home. A responsible person would have returned from
unemployment and worked to repay their just debts. 
 Examples of other large bureaucratic institutions that rely heavily on documentation include banks, insurance19
companies, hospitals, universities, and the Armed Forces. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 20
6
The other MCs under the guideline have been considered and none apply. In particular, the
record evidence is insufficient to establish that he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his
indebtedness because he has taken little or no action on the debts he does not dispute (see table).
Waiting for debts to age off a credit report does not fall within the meaning of good-faith effort. 
In addition, given the lack of documentation, his various claims and representations about
the debts in the SOR cannot be accepted. Large bureaucratic institutions—like the Defense
Department and the security-clearance programs it administers—do not run on word-of-mouth.19
They run on documentation. The documentation can be stored electronically or on paper, but it is up
to Applicant to produce reliable evidence, to include documentary evidence, to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by him and proven by the credit report.  Although20
Applicant is not legally required to produce documentary evidence to prevail, the lack of
documentation in a financial case makes it difficult to reach a favorable decision under the clearly-
consistent standard. 
  
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the financial considerations security concern. He has a history of unresolved financial
problems and it is too soon to tell if he will resolve the financial problems in a satisfactory manner.
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis
does not support a favorable decision. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
SOR ¶ 1–Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a–j: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue eligibility for security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge
