KEYWORD: Drug Involvement; Personal Conduct; Criminal Conduct 
DIGEST: This 56 year old Applicant used cocaine and marijuana from 1968 to1999, including
the period from 1985 to 1999  when she held a security clearance. She has not used any illegal
substance since 1999, and she stated that she will not use any illegal substance in the future.
When Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) in May 2004, she furnished
to the Government information that was not completely accurate regarding her drug usage, but it
was done inadvertently. Mitigation hast been shown. Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-23207.h1
DATE: 9/14/2007
DATE: September 14, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN: ----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23207
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
This 56 year old Applicant used cocaine and marijuana from 1968 to1999, including the
period from 1985 to 1999  when she held a security clearance. She has not used any illegal substance
since 1999, and she stated that she will not use any illegal substance in the future. When Applicant
completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA) in May 2004, she furnished to the Government
information that was not completely accurate regarding her drug usage, but it was done inadvertently.
Mitigation hast been shown. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 22,  2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20,
1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and
modified, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1) to Applicant. The SOR detailed reasons
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) why DOHA could not
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an Administrative Judge to conduct proceedings and determine whether clearance should be
granted or denied.
In a signed and sworn statement, dated March 13, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR
allegations (Item 3). She requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
On March 22, 2007, Department Counsel prepared the Department's written case. A complete copy
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and she was given the
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Response
was due on May 2, 2007. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was assigned
to another Administrative Judge on June 14, 2007, but it was reassigned to this Administrative Judge
on September 5, 2007.
In the FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits (Items 1-6),  which have
been admitted without objection. Applicant offered no documentary evidence into the record. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, based upon the
allegations set forth in the SOR.  The SOR contains four allegations, 1.a. through 1.d., under
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and two allegation, 2.a. and 2.b., under Guideline E (Personal
Conduct). Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.d., and she denied 2.a. and 2.b.. The
admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
Answer to the SOR and the admitted documents, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I
3
make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 56 years old. She is employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
it states that she has used illegal substances. 
1.a.  Applicant used cocaine at various times during the period from 1968 to 1999. 
1.b.  Applicant used marijuana at various times during the period from 1968 to 1999. 
1.c.  At times, Applicant contributed her own money for the purchase of illegal drugs.
1.d.  Applicant used cocaine and marijuana during the period from the period from 1985 to
1999,  when she held a security clearance. 
 
Applicant stated in her RSOR that she last used any illegal substance in 1999, because of a
“life changing experience.”  In her response to interrogatories, signed by Applicant on December 27,
2006, (Item 6) she stated that she does not intend to use any illegal substance in the future.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
she exhibited conduct involving questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability and
dishonesty.
2.a.  Applicant executed a signed  SCA on May 26, 2004. Question #27 asks,  “Since the age
of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance,
for example, marijuana, [etc.]?”  Applicant answered "No" to this question.  She clearly should have
listed her use of cocaine and marijuana from 1968 until 1999, as alleged in paragraphs 1.a and  1.b.,
above. However, Applicant  did list her cocaine and marijuana usage from 1968 until 1995 on
question  #28, the next question. Therefore, while Applicant did not list the correct year that she
stopped using illegal substances, she did furnish a great deal of information about her illegal drug
usage. Additionally on her RSOR, (Item 3) Applicant averred that when she completed her SCA, on
May 26, 2004, she incorrectly believed that June 1995 was the last date that she had used any illegal
substance. 
2.b.  Question #28 of the SCA asks, Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security
clearance or while in a position directly of immediately affecting public safety?” Applicant answered
"Yes" to this question, and as stated above, she did list her cocaine and marijuana  usage from 1968
until 1995. While she should have cited the dates from 1985, the date she first received her security
clearance, until 1999, I find that Applicant made a good faith effort to provide the information
requested by the Government and there was no wilful misrepresentation on either of these questions.
4
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations. These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline. However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision. 
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, "In evaluating the
relevance of an individual's conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following
factors [General Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in acts of alcohol abuse and conduct that demonstrates poor
judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future." The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
5
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, I conclude the following
with respect to the allegation set forth in the SOR:
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance. If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case. Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case. Applicant's improper
and illegal drug abuse, including the possession, and use of marijuana and cocaine is of concern,
especially while she was holding a security clearance, in light of her desire to have access to the
nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to her illegal substance abuse clearly falls
within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25 (a), any drug abuse, (c), illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, and (g),
any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Because Applicant stated that she last used marijuana or cocaine in 1999, and she does not
intend to use it again, I conclude that Applicant’s conduct does comes within Mitigating Condition
(MC) (a)., the drug involvement happened so long ago that it is unlikely to recur, and (b), a
demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future because of (4) an appropriate period of
abstinence. 
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
Applicant has used illegal drugs under Guideline H. However, Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's
case against her.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded for Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)  
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant provided incomplete and
incorrect information to the Government in response to  questions  #27 and #28, on the SCA that she
executed on May 26, 2004. However, Applicant did indicate that she had used cocaine and marijuana
for a period of 1968 to 1995, rather than 1999.  I conclude that when Applicant answered the SCA,
she did not knowingly provide untruthful information to the Government.
While Applicant did exhibit  extremely poor judgement by her use of illegal substances for
many years, especially after she received a security clearance, there has now been a period of eight
years where Applicant has refrained from using any illegal substances. 
6
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that no DC applies because Applicant
did not deliberately provide false information in her SCA.  I resolve Paragraph 2 Guideline E for
Applicant.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)
I conclude that since the incomplete  information that Applicant furnished to the Government
on the SCA was inadvertent, no criminal conduct was committed, and no Criminal Conduct DC
applies to this case.
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has overcome the Government's information
opposing her request for a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2: For APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.:  For  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.:  For Applicant
Paragraph 3: For APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.:  For  Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
7
