KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: The Government failed to establish a prima facie case. Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-25150.h1
DATE: 09/26/2007
DATE: September 26, 2007
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25150
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOSEPH TESTAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
The Government failed to establish a prima facie case. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The fact that an applicant has been arrested, standing alone, does not prove that the1
applicant engaged in criminal conduct. ISCR Case No. 01-12452 (App. Bd. January 27, 2003).
2
On January 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, as amended, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on February 10, 2007, and elected to have his case
determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel (DC) submitted the
Government's written case (FORM) on or about June 4, 2007. Applicant did not file a response to
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 25, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 26 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In March 2000, applicant was arrested and charged with Battery - Family Violence. The
charge was dismissed.
In May 2006, applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Fighting With Hands, Fists, and
(2) Disorderly Conduct. He was fined about $400.00. He paid the fine.
In the Argument section of the FORM, DC states facts about the two incidents that are not
in evidence; namely, that the first incident involved applicant punching his brother, and that the
second incident involved applicant “willingly [striking] a stranger over a parking space dispute.”
Not only is there is no evidence in the record that would shed any light on what happened on the
dates in question, with respect to the second incident, there is no evidence concerning the actual
charge applicant was convicted of.
CONCLUSIONS
The evidence establishes that applicant was arrested and charged on two occasions with
violent criminal acts. With respect to the first incident, the charge was dismissed. Since there is no
credible evidence in the record concerning what occurred on the day in question, there is no
reasonable basis upon which to conclude applicant engaged in criminal conduct.  I therefore1
conclude that this incident has no security significance. With respect to the second incident, the
evidence establishes that applicant was arrested and charged with two crimes, that he was convicted
of one or more crimes that may include Fighting With Hands, Fists and/or Disorderly Conduct, and
that he was fined about $400.00. Since I cannot determine from the evidence what crime he was
3
convicted of, I cannot determine if it was a “serious crime.” Accordingly, there is no reasonable basis
to apply Disqualifying Condition 31a. (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), or any of
the other Disqualifying Conditions under Guideline J. Based on the foregoing, I conclude that the
Government failed to establish a prima facie case.
FORMAL FINDINGS
GUIDELINE  J: FOR THE APPLICANT
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for applicant.
____________________________
Joseph Testan
Administrative Judge
