KEYWORD: Foreign Preference; Foreign Influence
DIGEST: The Applicant has renounced both his Canadian and Yugoslav(Serbian) citizenship.  His
Canadian and Serbian passports have been destroyed.  He intends no future visits to Serbia as he has
no immediate relatives there.  He will soon inherit an apartment in Serbia worth about $30,000.
Once he does, the Applicant intends to sell it.  Its value pales in comparison to his $3,000,000 net
worth in the U.S.  Mitigation is shown.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-22305.h1
DATE: 09/21/2007
DATE: September 21, 2007
In Re:
--------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-22305
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
The Applicant has renounced both his Canadian and Yugoslav(Serbian) citizenship.  His
2
Canadian and Serbian passports have been destroyed.  He intends no future visits to Serbia as he has
no immediate relatives there.  He will soon inherit an apartment in Serbia worth about $30,000.
Once he does, the Applicant intends to sell it.  Its value pales in comparison to his $3,000,000 net
worth in the U.S.  Mitigation is shown.  Clearance is granted.
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
Applicant filed an Answer to the SOR on March 26, 2007.
The case was originally assigned to another Judge, but was reassigned to the undersigned on
June 18, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued that same day, and the case was heard on June 29,
2007.  The Government submitted documentary evidence.  Testimony was taken from the Applicant,
who also submitted documentary evidence.  The transcript (TR) was received on July 12, 2007.  The
issues raised here are whether the Applicant's perceived Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence
militate against the granting of a security clearance.  [The Applicant admits the underlying factual
basis of most of the allegations, except for subparagraph 1.c. in that he no longer possesses a Serbian
passport; subparagraph 1.f. in that he also used his U.S. passport on his visits to Serbia; and
subparagraph 2.a. in that his father-in-law is now deceased.]
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the documents
and the live testimony.  The Applicant is 58 years of age, has a Law Degree from an American
University, and is employed by a defense contractor who seeks a security clearance on behalf of the
Applicant.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due
consideration of the same, I make the following additional Findings of Fact.
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
The Applicant was born in the former Yugoslavia in 1948, emigrated to the U.S. by way of
Canada, and became a naturalized American in 1991 (Government Exhibit (GX) 2).
1.a.~1.c.  The Applicant has renounced both his Canadian and Serbian citizenship
(Applicant’s Exhibits (AppX) D).  His Canadian and Serbian passports have been destroyed by his
Security Manager (TR at page 21 line 7 to page 22 line 1, AppX A at pages 2 and 3, and AppX D).
1.d.~1.f.  The Applicant traveled to Serbia six times from 1998~2004 to visit his mother and
his in-laws (TR at page 22 lines 2~25, and at page 28 lines 2~23).  When not accompanied by his
children, he used both his American and Serbian passports (TR at page 22 lines 2~25).  When
accompanied by his “twin boys,” he used his Canadian passport; as did his sons, to avoid his sons
4
possible conscription into the Serbian armed forces (Id).  As the Applicant’s mother and in-laws
have all died, he plans no further trips to Serbia (TR at page 28 lines 2~23).
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
2.a.  The Applicant’s father-in-law is now deceased (TR at page 23 lines 1~6, and AppX A
at page 5).
2.b.  He will soon inherit an apartment in Serbia worth about $30,000 (TR at page 23 line 11
to page 24 lines 3~25).  Once he does, the Applicant intends to sell it (Id).  Its value pales in
comparison to his $3,000,000 net worth in the U.S. (TR at page 24 line 22 to page 26 line 7, at page
29 line 15 to page 30 line 4, and AppX C).
As the Applicant stands to inherit property in Serbia, I must also consider that country.  The
newly-formed Republic of Serbia (2006) is a parliamentary democracy with about 7.5 million
inhabitants.  Serbia’s human rights record varies.  The government generally respects the human
rights of its citizens and continues efforts to address human rights violations; however, numerous
problems persist.  Anti-American sentiment tends to be highest surrounding the anniversary dates
of the 1999 NATO bombing campaign.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the 1992 Directive set forth both policy factors, and
conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern.  Furthermore, as set forth in the Directive,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense determination based upon
consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent criteria and adjudication
policy in enclosure 2, including as appropriate:
a. Nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct, and surrounding
circumstances.
b. Frequency and recency of the conduct.
c. Age and maturity of the applicant.
d. Motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct
was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of
the consequence involved.
e. Absence or presence of rehabilitation.
f. Probability that circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in
the future.”
5
The Administrative Judge, however, can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have
a reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline
C (Foreign Preference), which establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between an applicant's
adverse conduct and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to
sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who has demonstrated a Foreign Preference or who is subject to Foreign
Influence, may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a
security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
The Applicant, until recently, maintained Canadian and Serbian passports.  The first
disqualifying condition under Foreign Preference is therefore applicable as there was an "exercise
of any right . . . of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . .  This includes but is not
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport; . . ."  This is countered, however, by the
second and fifth mitigating conditions.  “[T]he individual has expressed a willingness to renounce
dual citizenship,” and “the passport has been destroyed . . .”  Furthermore, the Applicant has not
only “expressed a willingness to renounce,” but has renounced his Canadian and Serbian citizenship.
The Applicant has no immediate family members living in Serbia, and his $30,000
inheritance interest, which is in probate, is only about 1% of his net worth in the U.S.  This property
interest is not substantial.  I find no disqualifying conditions applicable under Foreign Influence.
Furthermore, I am not limited to the mitigating conditions, delineated in the Directive, in
deciding if an Applicant has demonstrated extenuation or mitigation.  A colleague speaks most
highly of the Applicants dedication, trustworthiness and reliability (AppX A at page 4).  The totality
of the Applicant’s conduct and circumstances, as set forth at length above, clearly warrants a
favorable recommendation under the “whole person concept”.  Mitigation is shown.  Guidelines B
and C are found for the Applicant.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has rebutted the Government's case regarding his
perceived Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence.  The Applicant has thus met the mitigating
conditions of Guidelines B and C, and of Section E.2.2. of the Directive.  Accordingly, he has met
his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guidelines B and C.
6
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings required by paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Foreign Preference FOR THE APPLICANT
a.   For the Applicant.
b.   For the Applicant.
c.   For the Applicant.
d.   For the Applicant.
e.   For the Applicant.
f.   For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Foreign Influence FOR THE APPLICANT
a.   For the Applicant.
b.   For the Applicant.
Factual support and reasons for the foregoing are set forth in FINDINGS OF FACT and
CONCLUSIONS, supra.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
