KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST:  Applicant is a 25-year-old junior production engineer employed by a federal contractor.
She is a native -born U.S. citizen.  Her father is a citizen and resident of Columbia, her mother is a
citizen of the United States residing in Columbia.  Eight aunts and uncles are citizens and residents
of the United States.  Six are citizens and residents of Columbia.  Her only sibling is a citizen and
resident of the United States.  She owns property in Columbia.  She has frequent, non-casual contact
with her parents.  Her husband has the same with his parents.  Her ties to the United States do not
mitigate the security concerns about foreign influence.  She surrendered her Columbian passport to
her facility security officer (FSO) thereby mitigating the security concerns about foreign preference.
Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-26564.h1
DATE: 09/28/2007
DATE:  September 28, 2007
In re:
----------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-26564
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHRISTOPHER GRAHAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 25-year-old junior production engineer employed by a federal contractor.  She
is a native -born U.S. citizen.  Her father is a citizen and resident of Columbia, her mother is a citizen
of the United States residing in Columbia.  Eight aunts and uncles are citizens and residents of the
United States.  Six are citizens and residents of Columbia.  Her only sibling is a citizen and resident
of the United States.  She owns property in Columbia.  She has frequent, non-casual contact with her
parents.  Her husband has the same with his parents.  Her ties to the United States do not mitigate
the security concerns about foreign influence.  She surrendered her Columbian passport to her
facility security officer (FSO) thereby mitigating the security concerns about foreign preference.
Clearance is denied.
Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application (SF 86), dated February 25, 2005).1
See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006)2
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service,
802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)).
See Stein, ADM INISTRATIVE LAW , Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative3
notice). 
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 25, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).   The1
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant.  As required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, as amended, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 16, 2007, detailing the
basis for its decision – security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Directive.  The President issued revised adjudicative
guidelines (Guidelines) on December 30, 2005.  DoD implemented them on September 1, 2006.
Pending official amendment/reissue of DoD Directive 5220.6, the Guidelines are to be used in all
cases when the SOR is dated on or after September 1, 2006.  Because the SOR was issued after
September 1, 2006, DoD policy requires that this case proceed under the revised guidelines. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 8, 2007, and elected to have a hearing
before an administrative judge.  DOHA assigned the case to me on August 3, 2007, and issued a
Notice of Hearing on August 8, 2007.  I convened a hearing on August 27, 2007, to consider whether
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's  security clearance.
The government offered two exhibits, marked as Exhibits 1-2.  Applicant offered three exhibits,
marked as Exhibits A-C.  All exhibits were admitted without objection.  I kept the record open until
September 17, 2007, to allow Applicant the time to file additional documents.  She filed seven
documents that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits D through J.  The government had no objection
and the exhibits were admitted.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 5, 2007.
PROCEDURAL RULINGS
Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of the facts in Government Exhibits A3
through A7.  Applicant stated he had no objection to administrative notice of the exhibits. 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings.   The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice2
facts that are either well known or from government reports.   I took administrative notice of various3
facts derived from Government Exhibits A3 through A7, as indicated under subheading “Columbia”
of this decision.
Tr. at 10, 17.4
Id. at 11.5
Id. at 13.6
Id. at 15.7
Id. at 22.8
Id. at 40.9
Id. at 23.10
Id. at 25.11
Id. at 25-27.12
Id. at 28.13
Id. at 32; Applicant’s Exhibit J (Letter from Applicant’s Father, dated September 13, 2007) at 1.14
4
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR.  The admissions are incorporated
herein as findings of fact.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 25-year-old junior production engineer employed by a federal contractor.   She4
is married and has no children.   She has a bachelor's degree in industrial engineering.   She has no5 6
military service and this is her first application for a security clearance.7
Applicant was born in the United States, moved with her parents to Columbia in 1996 to
finish high school, and in 2000, returned to the United States.   Her father is a citizen and resident8
of Columbia, her mother is a citizen of the United States residing in Columbia, and her husband’s
parents are citizens and residents of Columbia.  She traveled to Columbia in December 2004 and
2006.   In 2005, her parents deeded her residential real property in Columbia, having a value of9
between $60,000 - $70,000.
Applicant has one sister who is a United States citizen living in the U.S.   Her maternal10
grandmother, 76, is a United States citizen living in Columbia.  She worked in an electronics
business prior to her retirement and return to Columbia.   Her paternal grandmother, 90, is a resident11
and citizen of Columbia.  Her father has eight siblings, four are citizens and residents of the United
States, and the other four are citizens and residents of Columbia.  Her mother has six siblings, all
citizens of the United States, four of whom are residents of the United States and two are residents
of Columbia.   None of her extended family members have ever worked for the Colombian12
government.   In 1984, her father was convicted in the U.S. of drug conspiracy.  He was incarcerated13
until 1996, and then deported.   This year, her mother spent four months in the United States,14
returning to Columbia at the end of August 2007.  Her parents own the property where she and her
Id. at 34-36.15
Id. at 41-42.16
Applicant’s Exhibit A (Letter from Facility Security Officer, dated March 12, 2007) at 1.17
Tr. at 20, 28-29.18
Applicant’s Exhibits E-H (Appreciation and Quality Awards, dated April 20, 2006 to at least June 2007).19
Administrative Exhibit 3 (Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2006: Columbia, United States Department20
of State, dated March 6, 2007) at 1.
Administrative Exhibit 7 (Consular Information Sheet: Columbia, United States Department of State, dated June 21,21
2007) at 1.
 Administrative Exhibit 5 (Travel Warning: Columbia, United States Department of State, current as of June 4, 2007)22
at 1.
Id. 23
Administrative Exhibit 7, supra, note 18, at 2-3.24
5
sister live.   She communicates weekly with her mother and twice per month with her father.  Her15
husband talks with his parents weekly.16
Applicant has a Colombian passport issued June 24, 1997, which expired June 24, 2007.  On
March 12, 2007, she surrendered her passport to her facility security officer (FSO), who accepted
responsibility for her passport, and secured it in his office.  If this passport is returned to Applicant,
DOHA will be immediately notified.17
Applicant maintains a 401(k) plan through her employer.  She and her husband have checking
and savings accounts, they vote in U.S. elections, and they live rent-free in the U.S. property
belonging to her parents.  When the real estate market in Columbia improves, she plans to sell her
property and invest the proceeds in a home in the United States.   She has received several quality18
awards from her employer.19
Columbia
Columbia is a constitutional, multiparty democracy, and  with a population of approximately
42 million.  It is the second most populous country in South America.  Any person born in20
Columbia is considered a Colombian citizen.21
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens to the dangers of travel to Columbia.  Violence
by narco-terrorist groups and other criminal elements continues to affect all parts of the country,
urban and rural, including border areas.  Citizens of the United States and other countries continue22
to be victims of threats, kidnapings, and other criminal acts.   Official Americans and their families23
have severe restrictions on travel to and within Columbia due to these dangers.   Kidnap or murder24
victim in Colombia have included journalists, missionaries, scientists, human rights workers, and
Id.25
Administrative Exhibit 4 (Consular Information Sheet: Columbia, United States Department of State, dated August26
17, 2006) at 1.
Id.27
Administrative Exhibit 7, supra, note 18, at 3.28
Id. at 2.29
Id.30
Administrative Exhibit 6 (Chapter 2 - Country Reports: Western Hemisphere Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism,31
United States Department of State, dated April 30, 2007) at 5.
Id.32
Administrative Exhibit 7, supra, note 18, at 2.33
Administrative Exhibit 6, supra, note 28, at 5.34
Administrative Exhibit 3, supra, note 17, at 1.35
6
business people, tourists, and even small children.   Approximately 370 kidnapings committed by25
terrorist groups and for-profit kidnap gangs were reported to authorities in 2005.  There was at least26
one kidnaping of an American citizen in 2005.   Armed robbery and other violent crimes are27
common in major cities.28
The secretary of state has designated free Colombian groups - the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), and the United Self-Defense
Forces of Colombia (AUC) - as foreign terrorist organizations.  These groups have carried out
bombings and other attacks in and around major urban areas, including against civilian targets.29
Terrorist groups have also targeted critical infrastructure (e.g., water, oil, gas, and electricity), public
recreational areas, and modes of transportation.   The FARC has targeted civilians, government30
representatives, politicians, soldiers, and the civilian infrastructure.   Three Irish Republican Army31
members assisted in training the FARC on IRA bomb tactics in Columbia.   The FARC continues32
to hold three U.S. government contractors as hostages - all U.S. citizens - who were captured in
February 2003 when their small plane went down in a remote area of Columbia.   Some border areas33
have become terrorist safe havens.34
Although the governments respect for human rights continued to improve, serious problems
remain.  Unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, insubordinate military
collaboration with criminal groups, torture and mistreatment of detainees, overcrowded and insecure
prisons, and other serious human rights abuses were reported during the 2006.  Illegal armed groups
and terrorist groups committed the majority of human rights violations - including political killings
and kidnapings, forced disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses.35
Colombia is a major source of women and girls trafficked into prostitution.  Victims are
primarily sent to European and Western Hemisphere countries.  There also is internal trafficking in
Id. at 19.36
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion37
in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
7
Colombia for prostitution and forced conscription in terrorist and guerrilla groups, often with
children as victims.  36
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information”
(Guidelines).  In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC), which
are used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed
in the adjudicative process. Guideline ¶ 2.  An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal
is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  Because the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge
considers all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. Guideline ¶ 2(c).
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at Guideline ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5)
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”
Guideline ¶ 2(b).  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable,
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”   The37
Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a case which demonstrates,
in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.  Once the Government has produced
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to present “witnesses
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record38
evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, evaluates Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of
pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant has met his burden of persuasion under Directive
¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).
Executive Order 10865, § 7.39
8
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable clearance decision.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition
never shifts to the Government.38
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This relationship transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The Government reposes a high degree of trust and
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this
Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited.  Nothing in this Decision should
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.39
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline B—Foreign Influence
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, I conclude the following
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR:
Guideline ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and
interests” stating, “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she]
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.”
Guideline ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying in this case, including:
See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).40
9
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person
who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
and
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned
or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign
influence or exploitation.
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter
of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country,
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.40
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship with her mother.  She also has twice
monthly contact with her father.  Her parents gave her property in Columbia, and own the apartment
building in the U.S. where she and her sister live.  Her close relationship with her parents creates a
heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because of the terrorist activities of the
drug cartels in Columbia.  Her connections to her parents also creates a potential conflict of interest
because her relationship is sufficiently close to raise a heightened risk for a potential conflict
between helping or protecting a loved one and protecting classified information.  Her father’s
conviction for drug conspiracy, the fact he served 12 years imprisonment, and then was deported
further heightens the concern. 
The Government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying conditions, and
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition.  As previously
indicated, the burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.
Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially applicable
to these disqualifying conditions:
((a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
10
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation;
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they
are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or
pressure the individual.
Guideline  ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) applies to her relationships with her parents and her parents
extended families.  Her contacts with her parents are frequent, and not casual, given the ownership
of property she has in Columbia, and her living in their property here in the U.S.  These very frequent
contacts do not mitigate the security concerns because it is likely Applicant could be placed in a
position of having to choose between her parents and the interests of the United States.  She did not
meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationship with her parents] could
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  Accordingly, I conclude SOR ¶ 2. against
Applicant.
 
Guideline ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Appellant has developed a sufficient relationship
and loyalty to the U.S., as she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.  She has lived in the United States from birth to 1996, and again since 2000.  She is a U.S.
citizen by birth, as is her sister.  She received her college  education in U.S. colleges and universities.
However, she owns property in Columbia, worth a sizeable amount of money.  It  could potentially
be used to influence, manipulate, or pressure her.  Guideline ¶ 8(f) does not apply.  Applicant has
strong contacts and linkage to the United States, but her continued linkage to Columbia is
problematic.  Although this mitigating condition is partially applicable, these facts are insufficient
to overcome the security concerns as discussed in the “whole person” analysis, infra.
Guideline C—Foreign Preference
Guideline ¶ 9. The Concern. When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Guideline ¶ 10. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying
include:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen
or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.
Guideline ¶ 11. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated.
ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 11,41
2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972)
(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is missing when each event is viewed in isolation).
See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the eighth APF apparently42
without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF
mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance
because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd.
Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign
influence cases).
See ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).43
11
Applicant possessed a valid Columbian passport on March 12, 2007, when she surrendered
her passport to her facility security officer, who accepted responsibility for her passport, and secured
it in his office.  Should the passport is returned to Applicant, DOHA will be immediately notified.
The passport expired June 24, 2007.  The mitigating condition of Guideline ¶ 11 (e) has been
satisfied and I conclude Guideline C for Applicant.
Whole Person Analysis
In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as discussed
previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to the whole person concept
under Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  “Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must not
consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life separately, in a piecemeal manner.  Rather, the
Judge must evaluate an applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and circumstances.”   The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are41
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct,
voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant
of the nine APFs to this adjudication.   In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable42
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall
common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s
personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by
the facts of a given case.”43
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security clearance.
Applicant has lived in the United States for twenty-two of her twenty-six years.  Her mother and
sister are also U.S . citizens.  Eight of fourteen aunts and uncles are residents and citizens of the U.S.
Her ties to the United States are stronger than her ties to family members in Columbia. Her
Columbia passport has expired.  There is no evidence she has ever taken any action which could
cause potential harm to the United States.  She takes her loyalty to the United States very seriously,
and she has worked diligently for a defense contractor for several years.  No witnesses recommended
denial of her security clearance or produced any derogatory information about her.   
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990). 44 th
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).45
12
The circumstances that weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis are: (1)  she has
frequent and non-casual contact with her parents who currently live and reside in Columbia; she talks
to  her parents frequently. These contacts with her parents are manifestations of her strong affection
and regard for her parents; (2) she owns property in Columbia; (3) her parents own the property
where she and her sister live;  and (4) her father’s drug conviction.  Insufficient information was
provided pertaining to the details of her father’s drug conviction and subsequent deportation.  
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong presumption against
granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised, it is deemed best to err on the side of
the government’s compelling interest in security by denying or revoking [a] clearance.”   After44
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context
of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to
foreign influence.  This is a close case, but ultimately the evidence leaves me doubts about her
security suitability.  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”  and supporting evidence, my45
application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my
responsibilities under the Guidelines.  Applicant has not overcome or successfully mitigated the
government’s case.  For the reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified
information.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
DECISION
13
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is denied.
Christopher Graham
Administrative Judge
