DATE: September 20, 2007 
In Re:
-------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00999
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
DARLENE LOKEY ANDERSON
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer Goldstein, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
 The Applicant’s foreign ties, which include her mother and four sisters who are citizens and
residents of Nigeria, one of which is currently living in Ghana, pose no security risk.  Clearance is
granted. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
2
On May 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),
dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on May 26, 2007, and requested a hearing
before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the undersigned on July 16, 2007.
A notice of hearing was issued on August 3, 2007, scheduling the hearing for August 27, 2007.  At
the hearing the Government presented four exhibits.  The Applicant presented eleven exhibits and
testified on her own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on September 6, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the exhibits and
the testimony.  The Applicant is 49 years of age and holds a Bachelors of Business Administration
in Accounting and is presently pursuing her Master’s in Business Administration.  She is employed
as a Financial Analyst and seeks a security clearance in connection with her employment in the
defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts that could create the potential
for foreign influence that could result in the compromise of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Port Harcourt, Nigeria.  She grew up there until she was eighteen.
In 1980, after a year in Lagos, and with encouragement and financial support from her parents, she
came to the United States under a student visa where she attended college and obtained her
accounting degree.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G).  Her husband is deceased, and she has twin boys who
were born in the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I and H). The Applicant decided to become a
United States citizen in February 2005, because of her native born American twin boys.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit C).  After becoming a United States citizen, the Applicant did not travel to Nigeria, allowed
her Nigerian passport to expire and did not renew it, renounced her Nigerian citizenship by letter and
surrendered her Nigerian passport to the Consulate.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit B).      
Of her seven siblings, the Applicant has a brother who is a medical doctor and who is a
citizen of and resides in the United States.  She has two brothers who are permanent residents of the
United States, residing here.  They both intend to become citizens of the United States and
permanently reside here.  Of her four sisters, three are citizens of and reside in Nigeria.  The other
temporarily lives in Ghana.  The sister in Ghana is a pastor.  She and her husband are doing
missionary work that requires them to travel and they are only in Ghana temporarily.   The Applicant
knows that one of her sisters is a salesperson and she has little or no contact with the other two.  
The Applicant’s mother is 73 years old, a retired school principal, and a permanent resident
of the United States who is trying to obtain her United States citizenship in order to permanently
3
relocate here.  The Applicant’s father is deceased.  Her retirement is not much so all of the siblings
support her.  The Applicant sends her mother about $500.00 a year at the most.  The Applicant’s
mother currently travels between the United States and Nigeria in order to visit her children.  She
stays with the Applicant sometimes as long as six months at a time.  The Applicant’s husband’s
family all resides in the United States.   
The Applicant traveled to Nigeria in 1999 for three weeks to bury her husband, who was a
prince, the son of the Chief of the village.  She returned to Nigeria in 2000 to have closure of her
husband’s death.  She also traveled to Nigeria twice in 2003 and once in 2004.    
The Applicant has no assets in Nigeria and does not stand to inherit anything.  None of her
family is associated in any way with the Nigerian government.
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Nigeria.  The fact that
Nigeria is a federal republic composed of 36 states, which has a very poor human rights record.
Human rights violations include police brutality, armed robberies and murders to name a few.  I have
considered the fact that Nigerian Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses.  The fact
that Nigeria has terrorists activities, presents potential danger to Americans who travel there, and is
rampant with crime and instability.  The overall deteriorating security situation in Nigeria, the human
rights abuses and the government corruption elevates the cause for concern in the case.    
I have also taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Ghana.  Its human
rights record is better than Nigeria’s however, there still exists government corruption, including
excessive use of force by police, vigilante justice, police corruption and impunity, arbitrary arrest
and detention, and prolonged pretrial detention to name a few. 
The Applicant has not discussed the fact that she is applying for a security clearance with her
mother or her siblings in Nigeria.
Mitigation.
Applicant’s 90 day performance review reflects “outstanding ratings” or “consistently meets
standards” in every category.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit D).
A letter from the Applicant’s supervisor indicates that the Applicant is “an invaluable
program asset and she is ready to assume greater responsibilities withing the program and company”.
(See Applicant’s Exhibit E).  
A letter from her pastor indicates that the Applicant is a person of integrity and honesty.  She
is well known in the church community and is supportive of the church activities and their mission.
She is a member of St. John’s Episcopal Church and her sons attended the church school through
2005.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit F).  
POLICIES
4
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors and conditions that could
raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given binding consideration in making security
clearance determinations.  These factors should be followed in every case according to the pertinent
criterion.  However, the conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any
case, nor can they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be
assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human experience, or apply equally in every  case.
Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this
case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign country or financial interest is
located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  
7.  Condition that could raise a security concern:
7(a) Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
7(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if the
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.
8.  Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8 (a) The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons
are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely
the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization or government and the interests of the U.S.;
8(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should consider the following general
factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
5
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics and
conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed in Section 2 of Executive Order
10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request
for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period
of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted upon the individual meeting
these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number
of variables known as the whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.   The
Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions based on evidence
which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in
Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence) that establishes
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or
nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct and her ability to effectively safeguard
classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in refutation,
explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past adverse conduct, is unlikely
to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates that his foreign connections may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  The mere
6
possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be
counted upon to place the interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The
Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide
by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and factors, and
having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this Administrative Judge concludes
that the Government has established its case as to all allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's
foreign contacts have a direct and negative impact on her suitability for access to classified
information.  
The Applicant was born in Nigeria and immigrated to the United States, where she has lived
for the past twenty-seven years.  She became a naturalized United States citizen in February 2005
and renounced her Nigerian citizenship and surrendered her Nigerian passport.  She has twin sons
who are native born American citizens that have impacted her decision to make the United States
her permanent home. With respect to Guideline B, the overall deteriorating security situation in
Nigeria, the human rights abuses and the government corruption in Nigeria certainly elevates the
cause for concern in the case.  However, under the particular facts of this case, the evidence
establishes that the Applicant is not vulnerable to foreign influence.  The only regular contact the
Applicant has with anyone in Nigeria is with her mother who travels between Nigeria and the United
States to visit her children on a fairly frequent basis.  Her mother is a permanent resident of the
United States and she is trying to obtain her citizenship in order to permanently relocate here.    
  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating whether the Applicant meets
the qualifications for access to classified information.  The Applicant’s qualities, characteristics and
circumstances have been considered.  The Applicant came to the United States at the age of eighteen
and has made it her permanent home.  She was the first in her family to make the United States her
permanent home.  Since immigrating to the United States, the Applicant has been a productive
member of society.  She has obtained her Bachelor’s degree and is currently working on her Master’s
degree.  She has established a professional career employed for a defense contractor and has
demonstrated that she is an invaluable asset to the program.  She has excelled in accomplishing the
American dream.  She has demonstrated her loyalty and commitment to the United States.  She has
expressed strong positive feelings toward the United States and is grateful for the opportunities that
she has found both through her ability to obtain higher education and in her professional
development.  She is well respected by his superiors and professional colleagues.  The Applicant is
a credible, intelligent, and forthright individual.  Most importantly, she understands her
responsibilities to the United States when holding a security clearance and will never under any
circumstances improperly divulge classified information.  The current political conditions in Nigeria,
although horrible, do not adversely effected the Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Under Guideline B, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) Contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
7
pressure, or coercion and 7(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if the relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure or coercion applies.  However, Mitigating Conditions 8 (a) The nature of the relationships
with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities
of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position
of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization or government
and the interests of the U.S. and 8(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation
are applicable.  The Applicant has three brothers who are citizens and residents of the United States
and a mother who is in the process of obtaining her United States citizenship in order to relocate
here.  The Applicant has little or no contact with her four sisters who remain in Nigeria or Ghana.
Arguably, the Applicant’s mother who was at one time a school principal, could be said to
have worked for the Nigerian Government, as the school was a public school available to all
Nigerian citizens.  She is now retired and has been for many years.  Her small pension from the
Nigerian Government provides little in the way of financial support.  The Applicant and her siblings
send money to their mother to help support her.  However, given the number of siblings involved,
the Applicant sends only as much as $500.00 a year.  The Applicant’s mother is no longer associated
with the Nigerian government, or is she in a position to place foreign influence on the Applicant, or
in a position to be exploited by the Nigerian Government in a way that could force the Applicant to
choose between loyalty to her and loyalty to the United States.  The Applicant has for the most part
cut all ties with Nigeria.  The Applicant understands her responsibility to the United States in holding
a security clearance.  Based on the foregoing, the Applicant’s relatives in Nigeria do not raise a
security concern and Guideline B is found for the Applicant.   
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of Guideline
B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.  Accordingly, she has met
her ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant 
1.b.: For the Applicant
1.c.: For the Applicant 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with
the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
8
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
