KEYWORD: Financial Considerations
DIGEST: Applicant has had a history of overdue debts that have not been resolved.  Mitigation
has not been shown. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 07-03226.h1
DATE: 09/17/2007
DATE: September 17, 2007 
In re:
-------------------------
SSN: -----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-03226
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Rita C. O’Brien, Esq.,  Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
  Applicant has had a history of overdue debts that have not been resolved.  Mitigation has
not been shown. Clearance is denied.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On May 11, 2007 , the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Exhibit 1) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant
and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be
denied or revoked.
In a signed and sworn statement, dated June 1. 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR
allegations (RSOR) (Exhibit 2). He requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu
of a hearing.
On June 20, 2007, Department Counsel prepared the Department's written case. A complete
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and he was given the
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A
response was due by July 28, 2007, but no response to the FORM was filed. The case was assigned
to another Administrative Judge on September 10, 2007, but it was reassigned to this Administrative
Judge on September 14, 2007.
Department Counsel offered eight documentary items (Exhibits 1-8), which have been
admitted without objection. Applicant offered no documentary evidence into the record. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges that a security risk may exist under Adjudicative
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Directive. The SOR contains eleven allegations, 1.a.,
through 1.k., under Guideline F. In the FORM, Department Counsel included a Motion to Amend
the SOR. Specifically, the Government moves to delete allegation 1.b. from the SOR, as they
received evidence that this debt had been resolved as of April 5, 2006. Through the FORM,
Applicant received notice of this motion, and no objection was filed by Applicant. Allegation 1.b.
has now been stricken from the SOR.
Applicant  has admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.k., with the exception of 1.d., which
he denies. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
Since this matter is being decided without a hearing, my evaluation is necessarily limited to
the contents of the various documents that are found in the case file. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the FORM,  and the
3
admitted documents, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following Additional
findings of fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old. He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)
The Amended SOR lists 10 allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.k, under Adjudicative
Guideline F. These debts will be discussed in the order that they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $650. In his RSOR
(Item 3), Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he avers that he plans to have this debt “corrected”
by September 2007.  No evidence was introduced to show that this debt has been paid. I find that this
debt is still due and owing.
1.b. As discussed above, this allegation has been deleted from the SOR.
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $265. In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he avers that he plans to resolve this debt.  No evidence was
introduced to show that this debt has been paid. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $13,494. In Item
3, Applicant denies that he owes this debt for an automobile that was repossessed in 2006.  He has
furnished no evidence to support his allegation that he does not owe this debt. Therefore, I find that
this debt is still due and owing.
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $34. In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he avers that he plans to resolve this debt.  No evidence was
introduced to show that this debt has been paid. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $35.  In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he avers that he plans to resolve this debt.  No evidence was
introduced to show that this debt has been paid. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,013.   In Item
3, Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he indicates that he was advised by an attorney that, since
this debt was old and had been written off, he should simply take no action and wait for the debt to
be removed from his credit report. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,023. In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he indicates that he was advised by an attorney that, since
this debt was old and had been written off, he should simply take no action and wait for the debt to
be removed from his credit report. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,941. In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he indicates that he was advised by an attorney that, since
this debt was old and had been written off, he should simply take no action and wait for the debt to
4
be removed from his credit report. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.j. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $100. In Item 3,
Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he avers that he plans to resolve this debt.  No evidence was
introduced to show that this debt has been paid. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
1.k. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,565. In Item
3, Applicant admits this debt is owed, but he indicates that he was advised by an attorney that, since
this debt was old and had been written off, he should simply take no action and wait for the debt to
be removed from his credit report. I find that this debt is still due and owing.
Applicant indicates that his financial problems began when he purchased a home in 2001,
which combined with his wife’s ill health, caused him to become overextended. He claimed that
because of his wife’s infirmities, including being wheelchair bound which was why they had to
purchase a new home, and her medical bills, his finances continued to deteriorate. However,
Applicant submitted no evidence that he will be able to manage his finances better in the future. 
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations. These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline. However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision. Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.
As set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, "In evaluating the relevance of
an individual's conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following factors [General
Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
5
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future." 
The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
Burden of Proof
Initially, the Government must prove controverted facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons.
If the Government meets that burden, the burden of persuasion then shifts to the applicant to
establish his security suitability through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation sufficient
to demonstrate that, despite the existence of disqualifying conduct, it is nevertheless clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue the security clearance.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Where facts proven by the Government raise
doubts about an applicant's judgment, reliability or trustworthiness, the applicant has a heavy burden
of persuasion to demonstrate that he or she is nonetheless security worthy. As noted by the United
States Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988), "the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials."
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance. If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case. The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her a security clearance. This the
Applicant has not done.
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal precepts and
factors, I conclude the following with respect to Guidelines F: 
6
The Government has established its case under Guideline F. The record evidence clearly
establishes Applicant's long history of indebtedness, and there is no evidence that Applicant has
resolved these overdue debts.
Regarding the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline F in the Adjudicative
Guidelines, I conclude both DC 19 (a) and (c) apply, because of Appellant’s “history of not meeting
financial obligations” and his apparent “unwillingness to satisfy his debts.” 
In considering the Mitigating Conditions (MC) 20, MC (b) could be argued to apply since
part of Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred because of his wife’s illness. However, no evidence
was introduced to establish that  Applicant  “acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Also MC
(e) does not apply because while Applicant has indicated that he does dispute his largest debt,
$13,494 in allegation 1.d., he has provided no evidence to substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
Until Applicant makes a good-faith effort and can prove that he has resolved his overdue
debts, and he can establish a record of financial responsibility and stability, security concerns will
continue to exist under Guideline F. I resolve Guideline F against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against   Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
