 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01906 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 10, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 17, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 7, 2018. The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered four exhibits at the hearing, referred to 
as Applicant’s Exhibits A through D.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record 
 
2 
 
remained open until close of business on August 21, 2018, to allow the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted one 
Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was 
admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 
15, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married.  He has a Master of Science degree in 
Engineering Management and Systems Engineering.  He holds the position of Test 
Engineering Manager for a defense contractor.  He seeks to obtain a security clearance 
in connection with his employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline M – Use of Information Technology   The Government alleges 
that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has failed to comply with rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to information technology systems, 
which raise security concerns about his ability to properly protect sensitive systems, 
network and information.    
 
 Applicant has worked in the defense industry since 2004.  He received his first 
security clearance in 2004, while working for another defense contractor.  As a result of 
a polygraph examination conduct in 2009, his security clearance was revoked.  
Applicant re-applied for a security clearance in 2014, which was granted.             
 
 Applicant worked for defense contractor A from February 2008 to October 2016.  
In 2016, while working for defense contractor A, without authorization and in 
contravention of his non-disclosure agreement, Applicant downloaded numerous files of 
company proprietary information on an encrypted thumb drive and took it with him after 
he had given notice of leaving the company.  In November 2016, Applicant began 
working for defense contractor B, a competitor of defense contractor A.  Applicant 
wanted to take the information on the thumb drive with him to the competitor where he 
was taking on a position of higher responsibility, as he knew that he would be working 
on the same engineering technology, and wanted to use it as a reference.   
 
 While at defense contractor A, he downloaded the information to an unsecured 
thumb drive.  The thumb drive contained both company proprietary information as well 
as personal information.  To further protect the information on the thumb drive, 
Applicant transferred the information on the thumb drive on to an ironkey, which is a 
more secure thumb drive.  Applicant did this because if he went to work for another 
defense contractor, and he was working on the same program, although they were 
competitors in the industry, he could use the information to enhance his situation.  The 
information transferred included cost pricing data and export control materials among 
other technology owned by contractor A.  Applicant did not get permission to transfer 
this company proprietary information, nor was he authorized to do so.  He states that he 
had no intention to share it with anybody, but that it was for his personal use.  Applicant 
states that he was not aware of the severity of this actions until he received a letter from 
 
3 
 
the FBI and from his previous employer.  Applicant also had a covenant not to compete 
precluding him from taking any technology he developed for Company A to another 
company.  An internal investigation was conducted, and it was determined that 
Applicant violated company rules and regulations, and committed a security violation. 
  
 Applicant claims that he made an honest, naive, and very foolish mistake when 
he left company A, and that he really did not understand ramifications of his actions.  
(See Tr. p. 14, and Applicant’s Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Letters for recommendation from his operations manager, recruiter, an 
administrative assistant, and other engineers with whom he works, state that Applicant 
is trustworthy and responsible and they would like to see his security clearance 
reinstated.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.) 
 
 A letter from the Applicant’s counselor with whom Applicant sought out a year of 
individual psychotherapy related to the loss of his security clearance in 2009, indicates 
that he would never knowingly damage any aspect an employer’s privileged information.   
(Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 Letters from his priest and two others working in the ministry, indicates that 
Applicant is highly professional and trustworthy.  He is well-liked by the congregation, 
demonstrates good character, is always respectful, and has an ability to motivate 
others.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  
 
 Applicant submitted a chart showing that Applicant’s security clearance was 
reinstated in 2014.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
4 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern for Use of Information Technology is set out in AG ¶ 39, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information.  Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information.  This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified, sensitive, proprietary, 
or other protected information on or to any unauthorized information 
technology system;   
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any  information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized; and   
 
(g) negligence or lax security practices in handling information technology 
that persists despite counseling by management. 
  
 Applicant without authorization and in contravention of his non-disclosure 
agreement wrongfully downloaded numerous company proprietary files.  Applicant knew 
or should have known that this intentional conduct shows poor judgment, unreliability 
and untrustworthiness.  Applicant committed a serious security violation.  The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Four Use of Technology Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 41 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness; 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel; and  
 
(d) the misuse was due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable here.  Applicant deliberately 
downloaded the proprietary information to the thumb drive and then to the ironkey 
without permission for the direct purpose of benefitting himself at his new company.  He 
knew or should have known that this conduct was against company rules and 
regulations and against his non-disclosure agreement.  Furthermore, he has a history of 
negligence and misconduct.  His security clearance was first revoked in 2009.  In 2014, 
Applicant, made some very improper decisions that have now negatively impacted his 
current clearance.  Under the circumstances, Applicant’s conduct in totality is 
outrageous, and unacceptable for a man of his caliber and education.  He has not 
demonstrated that he is reasonable, responsible, or trustworthy or that his decision 
making shows good judgment as it would relate to his Use of Information Technology.     
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline M in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Use of 
Information Technology security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
