KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The gravamen of these cases is not that the applicants are disloyal to the U.S. or that
they are of bad character.  Rather, it is that their circumstances are such that any reasonable
person, should he encounter them, might find himself in a position in which he could seriously
be tempted to place his loyalty to his family over his obligations to the U.S.  Given the evidence,
we find no reason to disturb the presumption of nexus between Applicant’s family connections
in China and his eligibility for a clearance. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07068.a1
DATE: 09/07/2018
DATE: September 7, 2018
In Re:
--------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07068
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
2, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On May 3, 2018, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works abroad for a Federal contractor.  He came to the U.S. as a child, having been
born in another country.  He became a naturalized citizen a few years after arriving in the U.S. 
Applicant’s mother, siblings, and three children are citizens and residents of the U.S.  He has held
a clearance for many years.
In 2011, Applicant married a woman from China.  She became a naturalized citizen a little
over two years later.  Applicant’s wife has an adult son who is a citizen and resident of China, as are
her siblings.  Applicant’s son works for a government entity.  Both of Applicant’s parents-in-law
are deceased.  Applicant last traveled to China in late 2013 to visit his wife’s family.  Applicant and
his son-in-law share no common language and are not able to communicate directly with one
another.  Applicant’s wife maintains regular contact with her son and siblings.  Applicant’s wife has
filed a petition to sponsor her son’s immigration to the U.S.
Applicant’s wife owns real estate in China, two apartments valued together at about
$140,000.  One of the apartments was purchased with the intention that it would be the couple’s
primary residence.  However, they eventually agreed to designate the U.S. as their residence,
although their current living situation is unclear from the record.  Applicant’s wife has an account
in a Chinese bank valued at over $10,000.  He stated that his wife is divesting herself of her foreign
financial interests, although he provided no corroboration.  Applicant receives a pension from his
previous civilian employment with the U.S. but provided no detailed information about his financial
ties within the U.S.
China is among the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic data and technology.  It is
the world’s most active perpetrator of economic espionage.  Chinese efforts to collect U.S.
technological and economic information are expected to continue to be a threat to this country’s
economic security.  China’s intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities,
often seek to exploit Chinese citizens or person with family ties to China.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
Though noting Applicant’s lack of direct ties with his wife’s Chinese relatives, the Judge
concluded that his wife’s ties to them and her financial interests in China create a potential conflict
of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect classified information and his desire to help a
foreign person, group, or government.
The Judge also concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concern raised by his wife’s
Chinese relatives.  She stated that the wife’s ties within China may be as strong as Applicant’s
within the U.S., noting the couple’s intent to use one of the apartments as a personal residence.  She
also noted her finding that there is little evidence in the record about Applicant’s financial ties within
the U.S.  The Judge concluded that, based upon the record that was before her, she could not resolve
all of the doubts raised by Applicant’s connections within China.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  He has challenged some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  Among other things,
he states that his wife’s bank account in China is significantly less than the amount that the Judge
found.  He also denies that either of the apartments were intended to serve as a personal residence. 
We note record evidence to the effect that his wife’s bank account is now worth about
$5,000.  Answer to SOR at 3.  The Judge did not address this matter in her Decision.  However,
given the totality of the evidence, it is not likely that she would have arrived at a different conclusion
had she addressed it.  The finding that one of the apartments was purchased to serve as a residence
for Applicant and his wife is supported by Applicant’s security clearance interview summary.  Item
4, Subject Interview, at 6 (“The residence at [address] was purchased . . . with the intention of maybe
becoming their permanent residence but they decided to live in the United States”).  We have
considered the totality of Applicant’s challenges to the Judge’s findings.  We conclude that the
Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon substantial evidence or constitute
reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  Applicant has cited to no harmful
error in the Judge’s findings.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02640 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2018). 
Applicant denies that his connections within China pose a security concern.  However, in-
laws represent a class of persons who can present a security risk.  “As a matter of common sense and
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”  ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at
3 n.1 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015).  The relative obscurity of family members does not provide a
meaningful measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances pose a security risk.  Moreover, there
is a rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interest are adverse
to the U.S. and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and safeguard classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 2017).1
1A clearance decision “may be based, to be sure, upon past or present conduct, but it also may be based upon
concerns completely unrelated to conduct, such as having close relatives residing in a country hostile to the United
States.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988).  
3
In this case, the Judge’s findings, and the evidence underlying those findings, show that (1)
Applicant’s wife has close relatives, including a son, who are citizens and residents of China; (2)
Applicant’s wife has financial interests in China; (3) Applicant’s wife speaks with her relatives
regularly;2 and (4) China is an aggressive collector of U.S. protected information, sometimes
exerting pressure on those with family ties within China.  Taken together, these findings and
evidence  support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant could potentially be subject to a conflict
between his fiduciary duty to protect classified information and his interest in protecting his family. 
Indeed, the Directive presumes that there is a nexus between admitted or proved conduct under any
of the Guidelines and an applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02595
at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2018).
We note ISCR Case No. 09-07565 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012), which concerned an applicant
whose spouse was born in China.  The applicant’s wife’s close relatives lived in China, and she
spoke with them regularly.  We stated as follows at p. 3:
Under the facts of this case, the evidence raises a reasonable concern that Applicant’s
Chinese in-laws could come to the attention of the Chinese government and become
a means through which that government might attempt to coerce Applicant into
turning over classified information.
We conclude that Applicant’s situation is similar to that of the applicant in ISCR Case No. 09-
07565.  The gravamen of these cases is not that the applicants are disloyal to the U.S. or that they
are of bad character.  Rather, it is that their circumstances are such that any reasonable person,
should he encounter them, might find himself in a position in which he could seriously be tempted
to place his loyalty to his family over his obligations to the U.S.  Given the evidence, we find no
reason to disturb the presumption of nexus between Applicant’s family connections in China and
his eligibility for a clearance.
The balance of Applicant’s brief is a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the evidence. 
However, a party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01181 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 30, 2018).      
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
2Applicant stated that his wife communicates with her son weekly, by email, texting, etc.  Item 3, Security
Clearance Application, at 42.  We note Item 5, Request for Administrative Notice, at 6, which states that Chinese
officials monitor electronic communications, such as telephone conversations, email messages, and text messages.  
4
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan at 528.  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board.  
6
