 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-03635 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Pro se 
Jon L. Pierro, Personal Representative1 
 
 
September 11, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has resolved all of his once past-due debts. Based on a review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on August 7, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On January 20, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
                                                 
1 Applicant represented himself at the September 7, 2017 hearing for the sole purpose of requesting a 
continuance. The Personal Representative appeared at the November 1, 2017 hearing. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.2 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on February 6, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on March 2, 2017. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 5, 2017. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 7, 2017. Appellant appeared on that 
date for the sole purpose of requesting a continuance. The continuance was granted and 
the case reset for November 1, 2017. The transcript (Tr.) of the first hearing was received 
on September 15, 2017. 
 
The hearing was reconvened on November 1, 2017. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 through 15, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Applicant Exhibits A through H, which were admitted without objection, and 
testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open to permit 
him to submit additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of this hearing on 
November 9, 2017. 3  Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit I in a timely manner. 
Department Counsel had no objection and the exhibit was admitted into evidence. The 
record then closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 40 years old and employed by a defense contractor. He is married, 
and has three children. Applicant is seeking to retain a security clearance in connection 
with his employment.   
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleged, and Applicant admitted, that he owed approximately $60,655 in 
past-due indebtedness to various creditors. He also received a discharge from a Chapter 
                                                 
2 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
3 All citations in this decision will be to the November 1, 2017 transcript. 
 
 
3 
 
 
7 bankruptcy in 2014. Support for the existence and amount of the debts is supported by 
admissions of the Applicant, and credit reports submitted by the Government dated April 
8, 2014; August 15, 2015; November 2, 2016; March 2, 2017; April 29, 2017; June 3, 
2017; and November 1, 2017. (Government Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, and 15.) 
Applicant submitted a credit report dated October 28, 2017. (Applicant Exhibit H.)  
 
 The current status of the debts is as follows:  
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he owed approximately $44,602 in past-due student 
loans. Applicant successfully placed these loans into deferment status in 2016, with 
repayment to begin in 2018. He has the financial ability to pay these loans when they 
come due. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant Exhibit E; Tr. 17-21.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $14,562 for a balance due on a repossessed 
automobile. Applicant has made a payment arrangement with the collection agent, and 
had begun payments when the record closed. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibits D and I; Tr. 21-23.) 
  
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed $553 for a past-due debt. Applicant disputed 
this debt, stating that he paid it. Credit reports supplied by the Government and Applicant 
confirm that this debt has been disputed. (Government Exhibit 15 at 2; Applicant Exhibit 
H at 5; Tr. 23-24.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing $315 for a past-due pay day loan. Applicant disputed 
this debt, stating that he paid it. Credit reports supplied by the Government confirm that 
this debt has been disputed. (Government Exhibit 13, 14, and 15 at 2; Tr. 26-28.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing an insurance company a past-due debt in the 
amount of $312. Applicant disputed this debt, stating that he paid it. Credit reports 
supplied by the Government confirm that this debt has been disputed. (Government 
Exhibits 13, 14, and 15 at 1; Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing back child support in the amount of $311. This 
arrearage occurred because of a period of unemployment. He has since paid this 
arrearage in full, and is now current, as confirmed by credit report reports supplied by the 
Government and Applicant. This debt is resolved. (Government Exhibit 15 at 3; Applicant 
Exhibit H at 4-5; Tr. 29-31.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted that he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in December 2012. 
He voluntarily converted the case to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in October 2013 because he 
could not make the plan payments.  He received a discharge on January 7, 2014. 
(Government Exhibits 8, 9, 10, and 14; Tr. 31.) 
 
  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. His wife is employed, his work 
situation has improved, and they are able to pay their current indebtedness with no 
trouble. Applicant has changed his financial habits, including not incurring fees for non-
sufficient funds. In 2014 and 2015 he incurred over $5,000 in such fees. In addition, 
Applicant’s work is stable. He had periods of unemployment in 2010, 2011, 2014, and 
2015. Applicant understands the importance of resolving his past-due debts and 
remaining fiscally secure into the future. (Tr. 32-37, 41-44.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant provided two letters of recommendation from people who know him in 
the defense industry. The chief operations officer of Applicant’s current employer states, 
“[Applicant] is a rising star with unlimited potential.” A Marine officer who worked with 
Applicant for a year states, “I have nothing but the utmost confidence and trust in 
[Applicant].” (Applicant Exhibits B and C.)  
 
 Applicant served in the Navy from 1998 to 2005. He received an Honorable 
Discharge at the end of his military service. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section 15.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant had approximately $60,000 in past-due debts that he had not paid or 
resolved as of the time the SOR was issued. These facts establish prima facie support 
for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate 
those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has paid or otherwise resolved the debts in the SOR. The vast majority 
of the debt involves his student loans. They were placed in deferment before the hearing, 
and he evinced a credible intent and ability to pay them off. The other major debt was for 
a repossessed automobile. He made a payment arrangement for that debt. He is current 
on his child support. He is actively disputing three other debts, which total about $1,100. 
His current financial status is stable, and he evinces a credible intent and ability to 
maintain that stability into the future. Applicant has made substantial lifestyle changes 
that will assist him in staying on a proper financial footing. He has fully mitigated all the 
allegations in the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a national security eligibility by considering the totality of the 
applicant=s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for national security 
eligibility, and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
