 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 16-03434 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. Based upon a review of the case file, including pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
On December 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date. 1 
                                                 
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on January 11, 2017, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). On 
February 23, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed 
to Applicant and received by him on March 14, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that 
he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not timely submit a 
response to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 5 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. On or about June 1, 2017, he submitted a 
Supplemental Answer to the SOR, to which Department Counsel had no objections (S-
Answer). It is admitted. 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to 
another administrative judge on May 14, 2018, and re-assigned it to me on August 23, 
2018.  
 
Procedural Issue-Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR Paragraph 2.a, to correct the date on 
which Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), from February 24, 2015, to November 23, 2015. Applicant did not file an objection 
to this motion. Department Counsel’s motion is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations raised under Guidelines F and E with 
explanations. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant is 50 years old and has been divorced since May 2016. He served on 
active duty in the Army from 1988 to 1997. He reenlisted in 2001 and served on active 
duty until May 2015. He was honorably discharged after each enlistment. He held a 
security clearance while serving. After being discharged from the Army, he began 
employment with a defense contractor in 2015. (Items 1, 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his previous marriage and three 
stepchildren. He also stated that he was the victim of bank fraud as a consequence of an 
account his former wife established between December 2015 and January 2016.  
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from January 2016, the SOR alleged seven 
debts that became delinquent between 2011 and 2015, and totaled about $73,964. They 
included a mortgage, credit cards, and miscellaneous debts. (Item 3) The SOR also 
                                                 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
alleged that Applicant misused his government credit card from about 2013 to 2014 while 
in the Army. The status of these debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant submitted proof that he is no longer indebted to a financial 
institution for the formerly delinquent $71,008 mortgage account. The bank foreclosed on 
the real estate in May 2016. In November 2016, the bank notified Applicant that it had 
forgiven the deficiency balance of $4,777. (Item 1: S-Answer (C)) This allegation is 
resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: Applicant paid this $64 credit card debt in January 2017. He said he 
was unaware of the debt. (Item 1: S-Answer (C)) This allegation is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: Applicant paid this $502 credit card debt in April 2017. He said he was 
unaware of the debt. (Item 1: S-Answer (D)) This allegation is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: Applicant stated that he disputed this $98 debt owed to a cell phone 
company. He said he continues to have service with the company. (Item 1: S-Answer) 
This allegation is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: Applicant stated that he has been unable to resolve this $1,754 debt 
owed to a university. He contacted the university to resolve the debt but was told the debt 
was written-off as a loss, and the university representative did not know how to reconcile 
a closed account. (Item 1: S-Answer) This allegation is found in his favor.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: Applicant paid this $140 debt owed to an insurance company in August 
2016. (Item 1: S-Answer (C)) This allegation is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: Applicant paid this $398 credit card debt in July 2016. (Item 1: S-
Answer (B)) This allegation is resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: Applicant stated that he made a poor decision when he allowed his 
former wife to use his government credit card from 2013 to 2014. (Item 1: S-Answer) 
During a telephone interview with Applicant in July 2016, an investigator confronted 
Applicant about this allegation, asserted that the amount in question was $3,000, and 
indicated that it was possibly related to Applicant’s misconduct. (Item 7) Applicant said he 
promptly resolved this debt, but provided no proof of its resolution. He received a 
reprimand from the Army for this misuse of his government credit card. (Item 6) This 
allegation is unresolved. 
 
 Applicant stated he participated in financial or credit counseling, but did not have 
documentary proof available. He said he was working part-time in order to address all of 
the financial problems related to the divorce. He admitted that he experienced personal 
and legal problems during the last six years of active duty, but believed he was resolving 
those issues. He emphasized that he served with distinction for many years. (Item 1: S-
 
 
4 
 
 
Answer) He did not provide a budget or other information related to his financial 
obligations from which to determine current financial circumstances. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged the following three criminal charges: On March 1, 2003, 
Applicant was arrested for driving while impaired (DUI). The case was dismissed. On 
June 26, 2010, Applicant was arrested for domestic violence, assault in 3rd degree. The 
case was dismissed. On January 1, 2014, he was arrested for domestic violence, assault 
in 4th degree. The charge was dismissed in 2015. (Item 7) He completed a substance 
abuse course after the 2010 incident, and then again after the 2014 incident, along with 
anger management, as required by the Army. (Item 1: S-Answer) Applicant disclosed the 
2010 and 2014 incidents in his e-QIP. He discussed all incidents during a July 2016 
investigative interview.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to disclose the following information in his 
November 2015 e-QIP, as requested: In August 2011, the Army issued Applicant a letter 
of intent (LOI) to revoke his security clearance and access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI), based on the 2010 domestic assault charge and his failure to 
participate in a psychological evaluation. His clearance was suspended during this 
process. In September 2011, he responded to the LOI. His clearance and SCI access 
were reinstated in October 2011, two months later.2 (Item 6)  
 
 In his S-Answer, Applicant denied the allegation that he intentionally attempted to 
falsify his e-QIP. He stated he was removed from his previous responsibilities after the 
domestic assault incident and did not recall the administrative action that suspended his 
security clearance. He said he was under extreme stress during that time, and 
subsequently when he completed his e-QIP he did not carefully review background 
records.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
                                                 
2 After his clearance and SCI access were suspended in 2011, Applicant’s commander wrote a letter 
recommending that it be re-instated. He indicated that Applicant had received a Bronze Star and was a top 
performer in the commander’s battalion in the Middle East. (Item 6) 
 
 
5 
 
 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing deceptive 
loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
  
Applicant had a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2010 and continued into 2015. Between 2013 and 2014, he used a 
government credit card for personal expenses. The evidence raises security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to past marital issues and bank fraud. 
Those may have been circumstances beyond his control. However, he did not provide 
sufficient evidence that he attempted to responsibly manage his financial obligations 
under those circumstance; thus, AG ¶ 20(b) provides limited mitigation. There is no 
documentary evidence that he participated in credit or financial counseling; however there 
is evidence that he resolved six of the seven alleged debts: SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved in 
2016 through a foreclosure; and the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. are paid 
and under control. He unsuccessfully attempted, in good faith, to pay or resolve the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. He established mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) for those debts. There 
is insufficient information to mitigate the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.h, pertaining to the 
unauthorized use of his government credit card between 2013 and 2014.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two may be potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior. 
 
Applicant admitted that he was arrested in 2003, 2010, and 2014 for criminal 
conduct involving violent, inappropriate, or disruptive behaviors. Those arrests are 
insufficient to allege under the criminal conduct guideline, but are sufficient to raise 
security concerns when combined with all record evidence that calls into question 
Applicant’s judgment. The evidence establishes a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 
16(d)(2). 
 
Applicant denied that he deliberately failed to disclose requested information 
pertinent to the suspension of his security clearance for two months. He provided 
insufficient amplifying information to explain or justify his non-disclosure of this adverse 
clearance action, given the fact that he received a LOI informing him of the Government’s 
intent to revoke his clearance and filed a response to it. The evidence established 
disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his misconduct. The last criminal offense occurred in 
2014, almost four years ago. Two of the incidents involved his former wife. After each 
offense he completed mandated treatment and counseling to change his behavior. The 
likelihood that similar behavior will recur is diminished. The evidence mitigated the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d. The record does not contain sufficient evidence 
to establish any mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17 as to SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant’s defense 
that he was unaware of the suspension during 2011 is not credible. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
 
 
9 
 
 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual who served in the military for about 24 years. He 
received strong support from his command for some years of his service. However, during 
the last few years, he began accumulating debt and engaging in questionable conduct. 
He provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the SOR-alleged delinquent debts, including 
the educational debt that he attempted to resolve. He did not mitigate the allegation 
involving the misuse of his government credit card. He also mitigated old criminal conduct, 
but not his failure to disclose information in his 2015 e-QIP relating to the Government’s 
intent to revoke and concomitant suspension of his security clearance for two months. 
The absence of mitigating evidence on these allegations compels a finding that he failed 
to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:       For Applicant   
  Subparagraph 1.h:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:        Against Applicant   
  Subparagraphs 2.b through 2.d:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
