 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-03547 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), approved on December 10, 2016, amended the 
AG effective on June 8, 2017. I reviewed both AG. The outcome of this case would 
have remained the same under either set of guidelines.  
    
 On January 23, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 
20, 2017. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on September 26, 
2017.  A hearing was originally scheduled on April 5, 2017.  Applicant did not appear at 
the hearing. It was decided that Applicant was not provided adequate notice and the 
case was transferred to me on April 19, 2018. On April 24, 2018, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2018. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5.  Applicant testified and offered one 
exhibit which was admitted as AE A.  The record was held open until June 15, 2018, to 
allow him to submit additional documents. He timely submitted a set of documents 
which was admitted as AE B. The documents included a list of the SOR debts indicating 
the amount paid or settled with a reference number.  On July 20, 2018, I reopened the 
record, over the Government’s objections, to allow Applicant to present receipts 
regarding the debts he listed as paid and settled. On August 10, 2018, Applicant 
submitted an additional document, which was admitted as AE C. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on June 5, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DoD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since July 2017. He served on active 
duty in the United States Army from 1982 to 2014 as a U.S. Army Ranger, Special 
Operations. He retired honorably as a sergeant major. His career field involved regular 
deployments to include extended deployments to Afghanistan in 2002, 2009, and 2010. 
He has held a security clearance in the past without incident. He is a high school 
graduate and has some college credit. He is divorced, but is currently engaged. He has 
three children from his previous marriage, two sons and a daughter ages 30, 28, and 
18.  His fiancée has three children, ages 23, 22 and 21. (Tr. 18-21, 57-58, 62-65; Gov 1)   
 
On December 8, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as 
part of a periodic reinvestigation. (Gov 1) A subsequent security clearance background 
investigation resulted in the  following SOR allegations: a $7,834 credit card account 
placed for collection in 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 11); a $3,158 
credit card account that was charged off in March 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 
at 2; Gov 5 at 3); a $1,840 credit card account that was charged off in April 2014 (SOR 
¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 4; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 3); a $681 department store credit card account 
that was charged off in May 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 3); a 
$560 credit card account placed for collection in September 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.e:  Gov 3 at 
2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 11); a $426 account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: 
Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2; Gov 5 at 11); a $305 cable-television account that was placed 
for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g:  Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 2); and a $416 account that was past 
due in May 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.h:  Gov 5 at 3). 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after he and his wife divorced in 2011. He 
deployed a lot while on active duty and his wife handled the finances. He discovered 
several of the delinquent debts later. His divorce was contentious. When he retired in 
2014, he was unemployed for a period of seven months (October 2014 to April 2015). 
He was able to pay his day-to-day expenses from his monthly $1,500 military retirement 
check. His ex-spouse received the other 50% of his retirement check. He was hired by a 
defense contractor in April 2015. However, his net monthly income was $1,000 a month 
after taxes, and approximately $1,100 in alimony and child support was deducted from 
his pay check. This was insufficient to pay all of his bills. He was hired by his current 
 
3 
 
 
employer in July 2017.  His monthly take-home pay increased to $4,500, (Tr. 21-22, 33-
38) 
 
In early 2017, Applicant initially consulted a law firm about resolving his 
delinquent debts. He terminated their representation in the fall 2017. They advised 
Applicant to save money and pay off all of the delinquent debts at once. Applicant was 
prepared to begin resolving his delinquent accounts when his mother became seriously 
ill in December 2017. Her illness lasted until April 2018. Applicant consulted Consumer 
Credit Counseling Service in April 2018. They drew up a payment plan for him, but he 
decided to pay off the debts on his own. He also consulted Army Community Services in 
March 2018. (Tr. 39-53) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that he saved up approximately $17,000 
and he was prepared to resolve his debts. After the hearing, he provided proof that he 
paid off all of the debts alleged in the SOR with exception of SOR ¶ 1.h which is not 
listed on the most recent credit report in the file.    
 
The status of the SOR Debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $7,834 credit card account placed for collection:  Applicant settled the 
account on June 12, 2018, in the amount of $4,525.38.  Debt is resolved.  (AE C at 5, 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $3,158 charged-off credit card account:  Applicant settled the account on 
June 12, 2018, in the amount of $1,737.14. Debt is resolved. (AE C at 5-7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c:  $1,840 charged-off credit card account: Applicant settled the account on 
June 12, 2018, in the amount of $1,288.18.  Debt is resolved. (AE C at 5, 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $681 charged-off department store credit card account: Applicant paid the 
full balance on the debt on June 13, 2018. Debt is resolved. (AE C at 5, 10)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e:  $560 collection account: Applicant settled the account on June 12, 2018, 
for $364.26.  He provided a bank statement showing a payment of $252.18 was made. 
Debt is resolved or in the process of being resolved. (AE C at 5, 9)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $426 collection account:  Applicant paid the account on June 11, 2018. AE 
C at 5, 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g:  $305 cable-television account placed for collection:  Applicant paid the 
account on June 9, 2018. (AE C at 5, 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  $416 debt owed to a bank:  No payments were made on this account. The 
account is no longer on Applicant’s recent credit reports. (AE C; Gov 3; Gov 4)  
 
 Applicant also provided proof that he paid off several student loan accounts in 
full. (AE C at 11-14). As of June 13, 2018, His total monthly income was $5,025.24 
 
4 
 
 
($4,085.70 from his employer; $939.54 military retirement). (AE A)  In May 2018, 
Applicant received a $17,500 pay increase. He previously earned $95,000 annually. As 
of May 15, 2018, he currently earns $112,200 annually.  He also recently inherited 
$20,000 from a relative. (AE B, Tab C)  
 
Whole-Person Factors  
 
 Applicant provided 50 letters of recommendation from friends, co-workers, and 
former co-workers attesting to his reliability and trustworthiness. (AE B, Tabs D – G)  
Some of the more notable letters are summarized below.  
 
 A United States Senator wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf.  The Senator has 
known Applicant over 25 years. She met Applicant when he was serving in the same 
regiment as her husband. The Senator describes Applicant as a “stalwart leader, 
soldier, and friend.” The Senator states “[Applicant] is a most-loyal patriot for our great 
United States of America and has my strong endorsement for the approval of his 
national security clearance.” (AE B, Tab E)  
 
 The president of Applicant’s current employer states that he has known Applicant 
since 1994 when they both served on active duty in the United States Army. Applicant 
has worked for the company since 2017. He has known Applicant to a “forthright, and 
committed noncommissioned officer and employee.”  Applicant has never shown any 
behavior that made him question Applicant’s trustworthiness, ethics and commitment to 
the United States.  He states Applicant is not a security risk and should be granted his 
top secret security clearance. (AE B, Tab D) 
 
 General V, the Commander, United States Central Command, has known 
Applicant for over 30 years. Applicant served under his command and during multiple 
deployments. Applicant served in the U.S. Army for 32 years with utmost distinction, 
retiring as a sergeant major – the highest enlisted rank in the U.S. Army. General V. 
attests that Applicant “exudes the moral and ethical traits needed to possess a national 
security clearance.”  He is aware Applicant experienced financial problems since his 
divorce and is confident Applicant has taken steps to resolve his financial issues. 
Applicant has his strongest endorsement for a security clearance. (AE B, Tab E)  
 
 Applicant earned many awards and decorations during his service in the United 
States Army including The Legion of Merit; Meritorious Service Medal (4th Award); Army 
Commendation Medal (2nd Award); Army Achievement Medal (4th Award); Army Good 
Conduct Medal (8th Award); Afghanistan Campaign Medal with two Campaign Stars; 
National Defense Service Medal (2nd Award); Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; 
Kosovo Campaign Medal; Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal with Arrowhead Device; 
and the Military Outstanding Volunteer Service Medal, NATO Medal (2nd Award). (AE B, 
Tab B)  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems since his divorce in 2011. The SOR 
alleged eight delinquent debts, an approximate total of $15,220. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
7 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  Applicant’s financial problems were the result of his divorce 
and his unemployment and under-employment after he retired from the U.S. Army. 
Applicant’s financial situation is now more secure and his past financial issues are 
unlikely to recur. His efforts to resolve his delinquent debts once he was in a position to 
do so indicates that Applicant is reliable, trustworthy and has good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies because circumstances beyond Applicant’s control adversely 
affected his finances to include a divorce, a seven-month period of unemployment, and 
several years of under-employment. When he retired from the military, Applicant was 
unemployed for seven months. He was under-employed for several years until he found 
a well-paying job in 2017.  During his period of unemployment, he focused on paying his 
child support and his daily living expenses. Upon finding a well-paying position, it took 
Applicant some time to save some money so that he could begin to resolve his 
delinquent accounts. In December 2017, Applicant experienced an additional setback 
when his mother became seriously ill. Once her health stabilized, Applicant continued 
with his plan to resolve his delinquent debts. At the time of the hearing, he saved 
$17,000 to pay off his delinquent debts and followed through with payment after the 
hearing. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant pursued several options when dealing with 
resolving his financial situation. He retained a law firm and consulted with Consumer 
 
8 
 
 
Credit Counseling.  He ultimately decided that saving a significant amount of money and 
settling his debts on his own was the best approach. He provided proof that he resolved 
most of the debts alleged in the SOR. The remaining unresolved debt (SOR ¶ 1.h) is no 
longer listed on his credit report.  Applicant’s current financial situation is under control.   
 
 AG & 20(d) applies.  Once he earned sufficient income to resolve his delinquent 
debts, Applicant assessed the situation and made a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent accounts. He saved some money so he was able to settle all of his debts 
with the exception of a minor debt that is no longer listed on his credit report.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 32 years of 
honorable service in the United States Army.  I considered the favorable reference 
letters from 50 of his colleagues, friends, and superiors. I considered Applicant’s 
favorable service working a federal contractor.    
 
  Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his divorce, as well as his 
unemployment and under-employment for several years after he retired from active duty 
military service. Once Applicant found a job with sufficient income, he took steps 
towards resolving his delinquent accounts. He attended financial counseling and 
pursued several options before deciding to save a sum of money so he was able to 
settle or pay his debts. After the hearing, he provided proof that he followed through 
with resolving most of his accounts. The remaining unresolved debt is minimal. His 
financial situation is more stable. Security concerns under financial considerations are  
mitigated.    
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
