 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
09/12/2018 
__________ 
 
Decision  On Remand 
__________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to her 
connections to family who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On January 13, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On February 10, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.1 
                                            
1 The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, 
establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made 
applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
On March 10, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On November 9, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On December 19, 2017, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for February 23, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered one exhibit; Applicant offered 
five exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 9-10; GE 1; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE E). On March 5, 2018, DOHA 
received a transcript of the hearing.  
 
On May 25, 2018, I issued a decision granting Applicant a security clearance.  
On September 6, 2018, the DOHA Appeal Board remanded the case to me for a new 
decision. See ISCR Case No. 16-04056 (App. Bd. Sept. 6, 2018). After careful 
consideration of the Appeal Board’s comments and directions, I have revised my 
decision, applied the Appeal Board’s directions, and again grant Applicant a security 
clearance. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered summaries for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Taiwan with 
supporting attachments. (HE 4) Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of 
notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR 
Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 
F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice). Department Counsel’s requests for administrative notice are 
granted.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
previous AGs, and I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs. 
Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case.    
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. His parents and his sister are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan. His wife’s mother and her siblings are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. Applicant is a 50-year-old systems engineer employed by a 
defense contractor since 2009. He has not previously held a clearance. 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan in February of 1968. He grew up there and was 
educated in Taiwan until he obtained his undergraduate degree. He served in the 
Taiwan military from 1992 to 1994. (Tr. 14) In 1995, Applicant came to the United States 
on a work-study program. (Tr. 14) He attended graduate school and obtained two 
graduate degrees, one in 1997 and the other in 1999. (GE 1) He married in 2001 in the 
United States. His wife was born in Taiwan, but is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His two 
sons are native-born U.S. citizens. (AE A) Applicant and his wife became naturalized 
U.S. citizens in June 2012. He surrendered his Taiwanese passport to his security 
officer. (GE 1)  
 
Applicant’s 76-year-old mother and 81-year-old father are citizens and residents 
of Taiwan. They are both retired. His sister is a tutor and her husband is a tutor as well. 
(Tr. 21) Applicant’s mother-in-law is a retired teacher. His sister-in-law works for a 
nonprofit organization. Applicant has many relatives who live in Canada. (GE 1) None of 
his relatives know about his work or the fact that he is in the process of obtaining a 
security clearance. He contacts with family living in Taiwan is as follows: weekly with his 
parents; every other month with his sister; about every month with his mother-in-law and 
brother-in-law; and every six months with his sister-in-law. (Tr. 19-22) 
 
Applicant traveled to Taiwan once a year in the past and more recently once 
every other year to visit family. (Tr. 23) He has no financial interests in Taiwan. He and 
his wife own a home in the United States, which is valued at about $530,000. 
Applicant’s oldest son is heavily involved in youth sports, such as hockey and baseball. 
His youngest son is involved in the arts. 
 
Applicant submitted letters of recommendation. They attest to his traits as an 
excellent family man and a man of service to his community. He is well liked and 
respected in the neighborhood, and no one has ever seen any suspicious behavior. (AE 
B and C) The youth director of his church wrote that Applicant is professional, skilled, 
and extremely competent. He supports the community and volunteers in many areas of 
the church. He is widely respected by students and senior members of the church. (AE 
D) 
 
Applicant’s 2017 performance evaluation reveals an employee who has done an 
excellent job in various areas, and has provided invaluable input and ideas. He fulfills 
his role well. He learns quickly and is always professional, helpful, punctual, and 
available on stand-by when needed. (AE E) 
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant acknowledged that his family is in Taiwan and he realizes the security 
concern. Because his two sons and his wife are here in the United States, he believes 
they are a bigger influence than his relatives in Taiwan. (Tr. 17) He further noted that he 
took an oath when he became a U.S. citizen, that he would obey all laws of the United 
States. (Tr. 17-18) The Naturalization Oath of Allegiance to the United States of 
America states: 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; 
that I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arms on behalf 
of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform 
noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the United States when 
required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under 
civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me 
God.3 
 
When questioned, he stated that he would not be pressured into divulging any 
information, and that he would talk to his facility officer. He also stated that his authority 
is the U.S. Government. And since he is a baptized Christian, the Lord is his authority 
above that. (Tr. 18)4 
 
Taiwan 
 
The U.S. no longer recognizes Taiwan to be a sovereign nation. It recognizes the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) as the sole government of China, although it does 
not recognize the PRC’s claim over Taiwan. Taiwan is a significant trading partner with 
the U.S., although it has resumed dialogue with the PRC, resulting in closer economic 
ties between the two countries. Taiwan is of strategic significance to the U.S.  
 
Taiwan is one of the most active collectors of U.S. economic, proprietary, and 
sensitive information. Since 2000, Taiwan has been repeatedly involved in criminal 
espionage and export control violations of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology with 
military applications. Illegal technology transfers, even to private Taiwanese entities, are 
a significant concern because foreign government entities, including intelligence 
organizations and industrial security services, have capitalized on private-sector 
acquisitions of U.S. technology which in turn flows to foreign governments. 
                                            
3 The language of the current Oath of Allegiance is found in the Code of Federal Regulations 
Section 337.1 and is closely based upon the statutory elements in Section 337(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 8 U.S.C. § 1448, https://www.uscis.gov/us-
citizenship/naturalization-test/naturalization-oath-allegiance-united-states-america. 
 
4 In accordance with “well established DoD policy [Applicant and his family’s] religious affiliation 
play[ed] no part” in this decision. ISCR Case No. 08-06795 at 6 n. 3 (App. Bd. May 25, 2012). 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The SOR alleges and the record establishes Applicant’s parents, sister, mother-
in-law, and siblings-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant has frequent 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
contacts5 with all of his relatives living in Taiwan, except for his sister-in-law. His 
frequent contacts are a manifestation of his care and concern for his relatives living in 
Taiwan.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security [or trustworthiness] eligibility. Direct or 
objective evidence of nexus is not required.”  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. 
June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives living in Taiwan is not, as 
a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his or her 
spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (discussing problematic visits of applicant’s father to Iran).  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, his or her immediate family members, and this presumption includes in-
laws. ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 05-
00939 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 
20, 2002).  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for Guideline B cases, “the nature of the 
foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government 
are among the important considerations that provide context for the other record 
evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. 
The country’s human rights record is another important consideration.” ISCR Case No. 
16-02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 
2017)). Another factor is the nature of a nation’s government’s relationship with the 
United States. These criteria are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members living in that country are vulnerable to government coercion or 
inducement.  
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law 
including widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, 
terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Taiwan with the United States, and the situation in Taiwan, places a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with 
any family member living in Taiwan countries does not pose a security risk. Applicant 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative living in or visiting Taiwan.6  
 
Guideline B security concerns are not limited to countries hostile to the United 
States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. 
May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2004)) (discussing Taiwan). 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists 
from or in Taiwan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or 
through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. Applicant’s family in Taiwan “could be a means through which 
Applicant comes to the attention of those who seek U.S. information or technology and 
who would attempt to exert coercion upon him [or her].” ADP Case No. 14-01655 at 3 
(App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 3 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015)).  
Applicant’s relationships with relatives who are living in Taiwan or visiting Taiwan 
creates a potential conflict of interest because intelligence agencies and organizations, 
private or industrial security services, criminals, and other entities could place pressure 
on his family in Taiwan in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified 
information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships with family in Taiwan and has raised 
the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 
7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
                                            
6 The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 03-24933, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 346 at *20-*21 n. 18 (App. 
Bd. 2005), explained how relatives in a foreign country have a security significance: 
 
The issue under Guideline B is not whether an applicant’s immediate family members in 
a foreign country are of interest to a foreign power based on their prominence or personal 
situation. Rather, the issue is whether an applicant’s ties and contacts with immediate 
family members in a foreign country raise security concerns because those ties and 
contacts create a potential vulnerability that a foreign power could seek to exploit in an 
effort to get unauthorized access to U.S. classified information that an applicant -- not the 
applicant’s immediate family members -- has by virtue of a security clearance. A person 
may be vulnerable to influence or pressure exerted on, or through, the person’s 
immediate family members -- regardless of whether the person’s family members are 
prominent or not. 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant resided in the United 
States since 1995. He was awarded two graduate degrees in the United States. He and 
his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens in 2012. His two children are U.S. citizens. 
His house and employment are in the United States.        
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Taiwan. Applicant has frequent contact with multiple relatives, who are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan, including his parents, siblings, and in-laws. He 
frequently visited Taiwan. Applicant’s family living in Taiwan are potential targets of 
intelligence agents and organizations, private or industrial security services, and 
Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk to his 
relatives living in Taiwan.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Taiwan are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His U.S. employment, oath of 
allegiance, residence in the United States for over 20 years, financial connections to the 
United States, U.S. citizenship of his children and spouse, and statements of friends are 
factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. His connections to the United 
States taken together are sufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns 
under Guideline B.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency 
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the 
conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline B are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant and his spouse were born in Taiwan. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his family, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His frequent contacts with family in 
Taiwan are a manifestation of his care and concern for his relatives living in Taiwan.7 
There is no evidence that his relatives residing in Taiwan are government employees or 
military personnel, and of course, the government has no burden to prove that they are. 
His relationships with family living in Taiwan raise important foreign influence security 
concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the United States.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Taiwan must take into consideration the 
Taiwan’s history of espionage against the United States.8 Taiwan is one of the most 
active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.9 Taiwan has been 
repeatedly involved in criminal espionage and export control violations of U.S. restricted, 
dual-use technology with military applications. Illegal technology transfers, even to private 
Taiwanese entities, are a significant concern because foreign government entities, 
including intelligence organizations and private or industrial security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology which in turn flows to foreign 
governments. 
 
Applicant has resided in the United States since 1995, and he has strong ties to 
the United States. A DOD contractor has employed him since 2009. In 2012, Applicant 
and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens. They have two children who were born 
in the United States. They own a home in the United States. The good character evidence 
supports approval of his access to classified information. Applicant “has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that [he] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  See AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
                                            
7 See ISCR Case No. 16-04056 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 6, 2018). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 16-04056 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 6, 2018). 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
