 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-02875  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 6, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 25, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On November 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines C, Foreign Preference, and B, Foreign Influence. (Item 1.) 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, dated September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2016. He admitted all the SOR 
allegations of the SOR with a comment as to his alleged Foreign Preference. He 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. (Item 3.) On July 25, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on July 25, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on August 11, 2017, received by DOHA on 
August 16, 2017. He did not object to Items 1 through 6. Applicant also submitted 
additional information in his FORM response, to which Department Counsel had no 
objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on December 18, 2017. Items 1 through 6 
are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s response to the FORM is marked as exhibit 
(AppX) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Republic of Turkey (Turkey). Department Counsel provided a five-
page summary of the facts, supported by seven Government documents pertaining to 
Turkey, identified as Item 6. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, and is married. (Item 4 at pages 5 and 20.) He has 
worked for his employer as a “Manufacturing Engineer” since July of 2014.  (Item 4 at 
page 13.) 
 
Guideline C – Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that after becoming a U.S. citizen in October of 2011, he 
retained a valid Turkish passport. On August 7, 2017, Applicant “relinquished” this 
passport to his employer’s “Security Service,” as evidence by a letter from said Service 
 
 
3 
 
 
(AppX A.) Furthermore, Applicant has been informed that any future request from him to 
reclaim this passport will be reported to the government. (Id.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence  
 
 2.a. Applicant admits that his 80-year-old mother is a citizen and resident of 
Turkey. (GX 4 at page 22.) “She is a retired teacher.” (GX 5 at page 2.) He contacts his 
mother about four times a year. (GX 4 at page 23.) In light of Applicant’s limited contact 
with his elderly retired mother, I find no Foreign Influence here. 
 
 2.b. Applicant admits that his 54-year-old brother is a citizen and resident of 
Turkey. (GX 4 at page 24.) “He is retired from an environmental disposal career.” (GX 5 
at page 4.) He contacts his brother about once a year. (GX 4 at page 25.) In light of 
Applicant’s limited contact with his retired brother, I find no Foreign Influence here. 
 
 2.c. Applicant admits that his 71-year-old mother-in-law, and his 68 year old 
father-in-law, are a citizens and residents of Turkey. (GX 4 at pages 26~27.) “She is a 
homemaker,” and “he is a retired teacher.” (GX 5 at page 5.) He contacts his in-laws on 
a monthly basis. (GX 4 at pages 26~27.) In light of Applicant’s fairly limited contact with 
his elderly homemaker mother-in-law, and his elderly retired father-in-law, I find no 
Foreign Influence here. 
 
 2.d. Applicant admits that he co-owns “inheritance” real estate in Turkey with a 
total value of about $10,000. I find that Applicant’s $5,000 Turkish property interest is far 
outweighed by his connections in the United States. He has owned a U.S. residence 
since 2001. (GX 4 at page 10.) 
 
      Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts: There have been violent, 
terrorist attacks in Turkey, and the possibility of terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens 
and interests remains high. The most significant human rights problems in Turkey in 
included inconsistent access to due process, governmental interference with freedom of 
expression, and inadequate protection of civilians. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
 
 
4 
 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by 
any country other than the United States. 
 
  Applicant retained a Turkish passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are described 
under AG ¶ 11. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen. 
 
 Applicant obtained a Turkish passport before becoming a U.S. citizen. He has 
relinquished that passport to his employer’s security office. AG ¶ 11(d) provides 
mitigation with respect to this guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest;  
 
  Applicant’s mother, brother, and in-laws are citizens of and reside in Turkey. He 
also has a $5,000 property interest in Turkey.  The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant’s Turkish relatives are either retired, elderly or both. His contact with 
his retired elderly in-laws is only on a casual monthly basis. Furthermore, his foreign 
property interest is minimal, at best. I find no Foreign Influence, here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guidelines for Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.d.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
  Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
