 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01749 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 6, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On August 21, 2018, the DOHA Appeal Board remanded the Administrative 
Judge’s decision dated April 30, 2018, that it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.   
 
 On Appeal, Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that she falsified her e-QIP.  
While Applicant responded, “NO,” to the questions in Section 26 of the e-QIP that asked 
whether she experienced certain financial problems, she stated in the Additional 
Commends section of the document, the following remark: 
 
SF-Section 26 Financial Records:  In process of working payment 
arrangements with Student Loans and other miscellaneous accounts due 
to hardship; due to delay in wage check occurring between November-
December 2014.  Replacement/delayed checks arrived same day 1/3/15.   
 
2 
 
 The Appeal Board found that, “Applicant put the government on notice that she 
had some delinquent debts.  The Judge made no findings of fact about the quote. 
Consequently, the decision does not reflect that the Judge considered an important 
aspect of the case.  This is harmful error that warrants correction.”  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 55 years old and divorced with five children.  Applicant took 
University courses on line from 2004 through 2009, and received a bachelor’s degree in 
Health Administration in 2004 and a master’s degree in Psychology in 2009.  She is 
employed by a defense contractor as a Patient Safety Specialist.  She is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified eighteen allegations under this guideline, nine concerning 
delinquent student loans totaling approximately $77,469; and nine delinquent accounts 
owed to private creditors that have been charged off or placed for collection totaling 
approximately $8,678. Applicant admitted the debts in part, and denied them in part.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)     
 
Credit Reports of the Applicant dated May 30, 2015; April 29, 2016; and June 27, 
2017, confirm each of the debts listed in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, and 7.)  
Applicant divorced her most recent husband in 2001.  She claims that she experienced 
financial delinquencies in 2010 due to the fact that she was attending college and also 
helping her children with their finances.  In her response to the FORM, she indicates 
that it was during this time that she was recovering from a history of domestic violence 
and child abuse from her ex-husband.  She was undergoing related counseling 
involving her and her children.  She received no financial support from her children’s 
 
3 
 
father and she was trying to financially support her children on welfare, as she had no 
insurance from their father.  Applicant was confronted with unexpected car repair 
expenses that were unsuccessful, and she suffered a work injury.  She was also 
unemployed from September 2006 through December 2006; and from July 2007 
through March 2008, when she was looking for employment.  All of these things 
contributed to her financial difficulties.  As a result, Applicant became delinquently 
indebted to each of the creditors listed in the SOR.         
 
 Allegations 1.a., 1.h, 1.i., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.n., and 1.p., are Applicant’s 
delinquent student loan accounts.  These delinquent student loan accounts were placed 
for collection in the approximate amounts of $25,170; $14,253; $8,460; $7,606; $6,766; 
$5,918; $3,975; $3,630; and $1,691, respectively.      
          
 Allegations 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.o., 1.q. and 1.r., are Applicant’s 
delinquent debts owed to other creditors. These delinquent accounts were owed to 
creditors in the approximate amounts of $1,965; $1,416; $1,023; $893; $121; $66; 
$3,069; $71, and $54, respectively.  
 
 Applicant claims that her student loans set forth in allegations 1.a., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 
1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.n., and 1.p., became delinquent as a result of a delay in renewing her 
forbearance period.  Applicant opened the loans between 2004 and 2007 with a total 
original loan balance of $44,938.  The record does not show if she ever made any 
regular monthly payments toward the loans.  It does show that she made minimal 
payments of $5.00 per month on the account, which was placed in a trust required prior 
to being eligible for the loan rehabilitation program. Since then her balance on her 
student loan accounts continues to grow.  Applicant applied for and was granted a 
forbearance again in March 2017, as she was unable to make the slated payment 
amount at that time of $884 monthly.  Her most recent credit report indicates that her 
student loans are again deferred through March 2018, as she was unable to make the 
slated monthly payment amount of $976.09.  Applicant now owes approximately 
$77,469 in student loan debt.  Although the loans were opened over ten years ago, she 
now owes about $30,000 more on the loans than her original principal balance, and 
they have become delinquent in recent years.  In her response to the FORM, Applicant 
states that she will set up monthly automatic deductions from her bank account to pay 
her student loans.  (Applicant’s Response to the FORM.) 
 
 Applicant states that since receiving the SOR in this matter, she has paid off 
most of her delinquent debts owed to creditors discussed below.  In order to do so, she 
opened a new loan in the amount of $10,000 and used the money to pay the debts set 
forth below.  A concern here is that there is no evidence in the record to show that she 
can afford to make the monthly payments to repay this loan when it becomes due.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Response to the FORM.)   
 
1.b.  Applicant made a payment of $250 toward this medical bill (non-insurance) in 
December 2016. She indicates that she will make additional payments until the debt in 
paid in full.  Her most recent credit reports shows the payment of $250 and nothing 
 
4 
 
more, and that she owes $1,715.  Applicant claims that the debt has now been paid in 
full.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Applicant’s Response to the FORM.)   
 
1.c.  Applicant paid this old auto policy debt in full in December 2016, although she 
believes that she should not have paid it.  Her credit report continues to say that she 
owes $71.  She states that she is investigating the matter.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR 
and Response to the FORM.)  
 
1.d.  Applicant paid the debt in full, for cell phones she purchased for her children.  She 
states that she made payment arrangements with the creditor and then became 
delinquent on the account because she could not keep up the costs without her 
children’s father’s financial support.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Response to the 
FORM.) 
 
1.e.  Applicant paid the debt of $456.59 to Credit One Bank, after receipt of the SOR.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Response to the FORM.)   
 
1.f.  Applicant paid the debt off on April 8, 2016, after receipt of the SOR.  (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR and Response to the FORM) 
 
1.g.  Applicant finally admits this $66 medical debt, as it may be a Kaiser Permanente 
Services account, but does not indicate whether she has paid it or not.  (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR and Response to the FORM.)  
 
1.o.  Applicant states that the account was paid off and closed on March 28, 2016, 
according to a letter from Check N’ Go.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Response to 
the FORM.) 
 
1.q.  Applicant states that she was unaware that there was a balance due from this prior 
auto insurance policy and agreed to pay the amount due.  She did not provide any 
evidence to show that she has resolved the account.  To remove this from her credit 
report, she has agreed to pay the creditor $71 on December 19, 2016.  (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR and Response to the FORM.)   
 
1.r.  Applicant states that she was unaware that there was a balance due from a prior 
auto insurance policy and has agreed to pay the amount due.  She did not provide any 
evidence to show that she has resolved the debt.  To remove this from her credit report, 
she has agreed to pay creditor $54 on December 19, 2016.  (Applicant’s Answer to 
SOR and Response to the FORM.)  
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant completed an e-QIP dated May 5, 2015.  Section 26 asked about her 
Financial Record, specifically, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts Other Than 
Previously Listed.”  The question asked, “In the past 7 years, have you had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency?”  It also asked, “In the past seven years have 
you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to 
pay as agreed?”  Applicant responded, “NO,” to both questions.  (Government Exhibit 
4.)  These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list any of the delinquent debts set 
forth in allegations 1. a., through 1. r., of the SOR.  Under the Additional Comments 
section Applicant does acknowledge that she is in the process of working out payment 
arrangements with Student Loans and other miscellaneous accounts due to hardship: 
due to delay in wage check occurring between November-December 2014.  
Replacement/delayed checks arrived same day 1/3/15. 
 
It is noted that Applicant acknowledged that she was working on student loan 
debt and other miscellaneous accounts under the Additional Comments section.  
However, the questions in Section 26 asked her if she had any delinquent debt, and she 
responded with, “NO,” to both questions.  Applicant is tasked with the responsibility of 
answering every question on the security clearance application, truthfully.  In Section 
26, regarding Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts Other Than Previously Listed, 
she did not answer the questions truthfully.   Her, “No,” responses to both questions 
under Section 26 here, were false answers.  In fact, simply because she noted in 
another section of the application that she has had some financial difficulties does not 
relieve her of her obligation to truthfully answer other questions on the application.  
Section 26 asked her about delinquent debts, which she never admitted to.  In fact, she 
should have answered, “Yes,” to both questions under Section 26, by acknowledging 
that she had delinquent debt.  The information she provided under the Additional 
Comments section does not say that her debts were delinquent.  Under the 
circumstances, Applicant’s credibility remains in question, and it is found that she has 
not demonstrated sufficient reliability, nor trustworthiness to access the national secrets.    
 
 Applicant states that her student loans were in forbearance at the time she 
certified the e-QIP; and that certain debts that were opened under her name or that she 
was a co-signer on became her responsibility because her children’s father did not pay 
them; and that she learned about other delinquent accounts after she received the 
SOR.  She also says that she has learned that it would have been valuable to run a 
credit report prior to failing out the e-QIP instead of relying on her memory or recall.  
Applicant claims that there was no intentional misrepresentation or attempt at 
circumventing the issue or not acknowledging the accounts.  Her argument does not 
hold merit.     
   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
6 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s states that her most recent student loan debt forbearance expired in 
March 2018.  She now owes $77,000.  She took out a loan for $10,000 to pay her other 
creditors.  It appears that Applicant has resolved a number of her delinquent debts, but 
only by borrowing from “Peter to pay Paul.”  Her debt is not resolved, it is just 
transferred from one loan to another loan.  Given her circumstances, Applicant has 
probably done the best she could.  However, at this time, there is insufficient information 
in the record to conclude that she is financially stable or that she can afford her lifestyle, 
or that she has the financial resources available to handle her financial obligations now 
that she is no longer in forbearance status.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
8 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
  There were obviously some circumstances beyond the Applicant’s control that 
contributed to her financial difficulties.  Her periods of unemployment, her children’s 
father’s failure to provide financial assistance for the children, the normal expenses of 
providing for five children, as well as car repair expenses, and the like.  Applicant makes 
it clear that she is currently still responsible for her children’s support and welfare.  In 
addition, Applicant has promised to pay her student loans that are now due and owing, 
as her forbearance has expired.  Now what?  There is nothing in the record to show that 
she can afford to make the monthly payments of $976.09, or that she can afford to have 
them automatically deducted out of her paycheck.  Without this evidence, it cannot be 
said that she is financially stable or that she has made a good faith effort to resolve her 
indebtedness. 
  
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 It is found that Applicant deliberately falsified her e-QIP in response to questions 
regarding her delinquent debts.  She should have answered, “Yes,” to both questions 
 
9 
 
concerning her delinquent debts in response to Section 26 of the e-QIP.  Instead, she 
answered, “NO,” to both questions and then added comments regarding student loans 
and debts that she is working on, never once mentioning that the debts were delinquent.  
She did not answer the questions truthfully.  This clearly shows that she knew about her 
delinquent debts, and did not disclose them in response to specific questions on the e-
QIP.  The Government relies on one’s responses to the questions on the e-QIP to 
determine ones trustworthiness.  If the answers are not truthful, the Government is 
misled.  Applicant knew or should have known about the extent of her financial 
indebtedness.  There are no applicable conditions that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 
17.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.o.   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q.:   For Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.r.   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
