 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02713 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagle, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 28, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On February 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AGs were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AGs, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AGs, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AGs. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2017. He admitted the single SOR 
allegation alleged under Guideline F. He did not provide any personal statement or 
supporting documentation with his response. He requested that his case be decided by 
an administrative judge on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 On March 28, 2017, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing three Items, was mailed to Applicant on 
March 29, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM nor object to Items 1 
through 3, which are admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) Office assigned the case to me on May 14, 2018.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 50 years old and 
employed by a Defense contractor as a network engineer since January 2013. He has 
been married since 1998. There were no children listed on the SCA. He is requesting 
national security eligibility.3  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file and pay Federal income taxes for 
the tax years 2012 and 2013. On his 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had not 
filed or paid his 2012 and 2013 Federal income taxes, and he estimated owing a total of 
$20,000 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for both years. 4 
 
DOHA sent Applicant interrogatories asking him to verify his background subject 
interview report dated July 24, 2015. He was also requested to submit documentation of 
his filed 2012 and 2013 Federal income tax returns, records of any tax payments, and 
the current balance of any outstanding tax liabilities. Applicant did not provide any tax 
documents with his December 2016 response, and he listed that the Federal taxes 
remained unpaid. He verified the attached subject interview as being accurate. During 
his July 2015 interview, Applicant reported to the investigator that he had filed 
extensions for the filing of his Federal tax income returns for 2012 and 2013. He 
claimed that these Federal income tax returns were then filed. He owed approximately 
$20,000 to the IRS for both tax years. He was communicating with the IRS to determine 
payment arrangements, and he was waiting for approval by the IRS. Applicant admitted 
to the investigator that he had not yet started paying on his delinquent Federal taxes.5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Items 1, 2. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                    Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator or, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file Federal tax returns for at least two consecutive 
years. He owes approximately $20,000 for his Federal tax debt. He did not provide any 
documentation to show that he filed his Federal income tax returns for 2012 or 2013. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counselling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those 
arrangements.  
  
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) are not established. Applicant did not provide documentation 
or any explanation of his circumstances to demonstrate that his failure to timely file or 
pay Federal taxes is unlikely to recur. There is no evidence that Applicant’s tax 
problems were beyond his control. His failure to take action for many years does cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. He has not 
established any documented good-faith action of his efforts to resolve his Federal tax 
debt of approximately $20,000, nor is there any evidence to show that Applicant has 
filed his 2012-2013 Federal income tax returns. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d) and (g) do not apply.   
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) was 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old federal contractor employee. He provided no 
explanation or documentation to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, 
despite given many opportunities to do so. He failed to provide documentation in 
response to the interrogatories, the receipt of SOR, and after the receipt of the 
Government’s brief and attached documents. Absent a compelling excuse or reason, 
his failure to timely file his Federal tax returns and pay his Federal tax debt of 
approximately $20,000 reveals a deficiency in his judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness required of persons handling sensitive information. A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his legal obligations, such as filing income tax returns when due, 
suggests that an applicant may likewise have a problem with complying with well-
established government rules and procedures. Applicant’s conduct raises questions 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
