 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 16-03228 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that she was unable to make greater 
progress addressing two delinquent student loans. Financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 25, 2015, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) 
The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) generated 
the statement of reasons (SOR). The SOR was dated December 5, 2015.1 The SOR was 
issued to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). (GE 1) The SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under Guideline F. 
 
                                            
1 It appears from the content of the SOR and the date of Applicant’s SOR response that the SOR 
was actually issued in December 2016. 
 
2 
                                         
 
On January 21, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On March 19, 2017, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On October 19, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case was delayed 
because Applicant was deployed to a combat zone. On February 23, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
July 9, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits; Applicant offered one 
exhibit; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
(Tr. 18-20; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A) On July 13, 2018, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript. Applicant provided two exhibits after her hearing, which were admitted without 
objection. (AE B) The record closed on September 17, 2018. (Tr. 15-16, 44) 
 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, established in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted she incurred or had some responsibility 
for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. (HE 3) She also provided mitigating information. (HE 
3) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old project manager, and a government contractor has 
employed her as a procurement advisor in a combat zone for three years. (Tr. 6, 8) In 
1969, she graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) In 1994, she received a bachelor’s degree 
in business administration. (Tr. 7) She married in 1969 and divorced in 1972. (Tr. 10) Her 
four living children are ages 34, 37, 39, and 46. (Tr. 10) One of her children passed away. 
(Tr. 10) Applicant was a federal civilian employee for 29 years. (Tr. 21) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
From 2006 to 2014, Applicant’s annual salary was about $135,000 because she 
worked in a combat zone. (Tr. 21) In January 2014, Applicant retired from her federal 
employment; she was unemployed for about 15 months; and then she obtained 
employment with a DOD contractor. (Tr. 8) When she left federal government employment, 
she was a GS-11 contracting officer. (Tr. 8-9) Applicant said at her hearing that she lacked 
access to important financial documentation because she was waiting for boxes of 
documents to arrive at her current overseas location, and she requested 60 days after her 
hearing to obtain and provide documents. (Tr. 15) I set a suspense of September 17, 2018, 
for her to provide documents, and advised her she could have additional time if she 
                                            
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
3 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
requested it. (Tr. 15) Applicant’s current annual salary from the DOD contractor is about 
$135,000. (Tr. 34) She receives $24,000 annually for her federal-employee retirement, 
and she recently began receiving $2,000 monthly from the Social Security Administration. 
(Tr. 35) She has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 35) 
   
The status of the SOR allegations is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant failed to file her federal income tax returns for tax years 
2013 and 2014 as required by law. She did not timely file those two tax returns because 
of errors on her income statement (W-2 forms). (Tr. 27, 37) She asked the Defense 
Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) to audit her account. (Tr. 37) Applicant believed 
that she had 180 days after returning from an overseas combat zone to file her federal 
income tax returns. (Tr. 26) She was back in the United States from November 2013 until 
2015, and she acknowledged her 2013 federal income tax return was not timely filed. (Tr. 
39) In January 2017, she filed her state and federal income tax returns for tax year 2013, 
and in August 2017, she filed her state and federal income tax returns for tax year 2014. 
(AE B) In August 2017, she paid the IRS $12,701, and her taxes are paid. (AE B) She said 
her federal income tax returns for 2015, 2016, and 2017 were timely filed. (Tr. 27)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant owes a medical debt for $135. (Tr. 28) Applicant said 
she did not receive the medical treatment, and the creditor did not properly complete the 
bill. (Tr. 28) She said she disputed the debt, and it was removed from her credit report. 
(Tr. 28)   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d allege two student loans placed for collection for $9,038 and 
$9,368. The collection agent for both loans is designated as CA. Applicant said she 
cosigned for her former son-in-law’s (J) student loans around 2008, and the debts have 
been delinquent about 10 years. (Tr. 17-18, 29, 32) She said her daughter made payments 
on the two student loans for about two years before her daughter lost her employment. 
(GE 2) During Applicant’s August 15, 2016 Office of Personnel Management personal 
subject interview, Applicant said she refused to pay these debts on principle because J 
told her daughter that J would not pay his student loans to cause Applicant difficulties. (Tr. 
29-30; GE 2) Applicant had the funds to pay the delinquent student loans. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant recommended that the creditor garnish J’s salary. (Tr. 30) In a written statement 
dated the day of her hearing, J said he took “full responsibility” for the two student loans, 
and J was “more than willing to make any payment arrangements to clear [Applicant].” (AE 
A) J said he provided his contact information to Applicant (his home address but not his 
place of employment was indicated on his statement) to enable J “to be an active 
participant in paying the debt.” (AE A) 
 
Applicant has a generally good credit report with a solid record of financial 
responsibility, except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. (GE 4; GE 5) Applicant said that 
around October 2017, she contacted a credit repair company (CRC) about having 
someone negotiate with the student-loan creditor to reduce the amount of the debt. (Tr. 
31, 33) On July 9, 2018, at her hearing, she said she would pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.d. (Tr. 37)   
 
 
4 
                                         
 
On September 17, 2018, CRC wrote: 
 
This letter is to certify that our client [Applicant has retained CRC] to 
negotiate and dispute these inaccuracies and are in the process of doing 
so. Collection and Credit reporting agencies, have the tendency of reporting 
many mistakes and sometimes not updating accounts correctly. Our goal is 
to have the bureaus investigate accounts in question that are negatively 
impacting [Applicant’s] credit report for maximum possible accuracy.  [CRC 
listed the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d as accounts being addressed.] 
We will continue to work on this file until we reach an agreement. In the 
meanwhile, we have good faith in [Applicant’s] goodwill and good credit 
standing. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to call our office. 
 
Email from CRC (AE E) 
 
On September 16, 2018, Applicant said in an email: 
 
I had been in contact with [J] through my daughter a couple of years ago 
when this issue with my security clearance came up and [J] had said he 
would contract [CA] and see about making payments. I said I would pay it 
off, but [J] said not to [do] that it was his responsibility. I said I would help 
[J] and to let me know when [J] had it arranged. 
 
I came to Afghanistan in April of 2015, and once I was contacted to do the 
interview, I reached out to [J] again. He assured my daughter that he would 
take care of it. When it was getting closer to my hearing and had not heard 
anything back from [J], he said they were not working with him and he was 
frustrated. 
 
I was running out of time and should have just done it myself to start with. I 
assure you I will pay it as soon as [CRC] lets me know what they have 
negotiated on my behalf. [J’s] death was a shock but that left it on me to 
fix.[4] I have paid [CRC] a substantial sum to represent me or I would contact 
[CA] myself to just put it all behind me. . . . 
 
I hope you will consider letting me keep my security clearance. I made a 
mistake and learned a valuable lesson. I have been a loyal hard working 
person in war zones and contributed immeasurably to rebuilding both Iraq 
and Afghanistan. My taxes are all up to date. I really need my job. I am 
helping my sister, mother and others financially and it would be very 
detrimental to lose my job. 
 
Email from Applicant (AE D) 
 
  
                                            
4 Applicant provided a copy of J’s Certificate of Death. (AE C) 
 
5 
                                         
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
6 
                                         
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.” 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability 
of mitigating conditions. 
 
  Six financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,5 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
                                            
5 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant presented some mitigating evidence. She served in Afghanistan or Iraq 
for several years. She was unemployed from October 2013 to May 2014. J passed away 
without paying J’s student loans. These are circumstances largely beyond her control. 
SOR ¶ 1.a is mitigated because: (1) she delayed filing her tax returns because she 
believed DFAS provided incorrect income information; (2) she was deployed overseas in 
a combat zone; (3) her tax returns have been filed; and (4) her taxes have been paid. She 
is credited with mitigating the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b because she disputed it, and it 
was removed from her credit report. She does not receive full mitigating credit under AG 
¶ 20(b) because she did not act responsibly under the circumstances with respect to the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. Creditors rely on cosigners to pay debts if the primary debtor 
is unable or unwilling to do so. She was legally responsible as a cosigner to pay J’s 
student loans. Applicant had the funds to pay J’s student loans, and she did not prove 
that she was unable to make greater progress resolving J’s delinquent student loans. She 
did not receive financial counseling.  
 
There is insufficient assurance that the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are being 
resolved. Under all the circumstances, Applicant failed to establish that financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
9 
                                         
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old project manager, and a government contractor has 
employed her as a procurement advisor in a combat zone for three years. In 1994, she 
received a bachelor’s degree in business administration. Applicant was a federal civilian 
employee for 29 years. From 2006 to 2014, Applicant’s annual salary was about $135,000 
because she worked in a combat zone. In January 2014, Applicant retired from her federal 
employment; she was unemployed for about 15 months; and then she obtained 
employment with a DOD contractor. Applicant’s current annual salary from the DOD 
contractor is about $135,000. She receives $24,000 annually for her federal retirement, 
and she recently began receiving $2,000 monthly from the Social Security Administration. 
She has not received financial counseling.  
 
Applicant is credited for her service in Iraq and Afghanistan. Service in a combat 
zone on behalf of the United States merits significant weight in a national security 
determination. She mitigated SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant has a generally good credit 
report with a solid record of financial responsibility, except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.d.  
 
Applicant did not establish she had insufficient income to make greater progress 
resolving her two student loans. She has a substantial income, and she acknowledged 
that she had the funds to pay the two student loans. Her actions show a lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of her past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be 
able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  
 
10 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
