 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00979 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cheryl Van Ackeren, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his attempt to 
conceal his felony arrest for aggravated assault while applying to renew his clearance. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on February 27, 2015, seeking to renew his eligibility for a security clearance. 
On October 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). This 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 25, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 13, 2017. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on July 11, 2017, setting the hearing for July 27, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 4 through 9, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel also offered proposed 
GE 2 and 3, comprising two Report of Investigation interview summaries that were not 
admitted, in the absence of an authenticating witness, over Applicant’s Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20 objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through N into 
evidence. Applicant’s exhibits were admitted without objection. Two other witnesses 
testified for Applicant. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 4, 2017  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is seeking to renew the security clearance he held 
while serving on active duty in the U.S. Army for 22 years, in connection with his post-
retirement civilian employment. He was honorably discharged and retired as a first 
sergeant (E-8) on June 1, 2012. Applicant was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal 
and the Army Commendation Medal three times each, the Army Achievement Medal 
five times, the Army Good Conduct Medal four times, and various unit, campaign, and 
service awards.  He earned a bachelor’s of science degree in business administration 
(sports management) from a for-profit online university on September 30, 2013. He was 
unemployed from June 2012 until beginning his current employment in February 2015. 
He is divorced, with two adult children. (Answer; GE 1; AE K; AE L; Tr. 13, 67.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on June 14, 2014, after he and his son were involved in a 
series of alcohol-fueled confrontations with his next door neighbors. The neighbors 
called the local police and reported that Applicant confronted and threatened to shoot 
them with his shotgun after their complaints resulted in his son’s arrest for involvement 
in an earlier fight at the neighbor’s house. Applicant claims that his shotgun was located 
at his mother-in-law’s house some ten minutes away, and that the neighbors fabricated 
their complaint against him. Nevertheless, the arresting officer reported that Applicant 
was, “very intoxicated and quickly became belligerent.” He was arrested and charged 
with two counts of felony aggravated assault. (Answer; GE 8; Tr. 69-71, 119-121.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant was released from jail after posting a $10,000 bond, and was arraigned 
on two felony charges of aggravated assault in a court hearing on June 16, 2014. He 
attended two more court hearings concerning these charges on July 3, and August 7, 
2014. During the final hearing, mutual restraining orders were issued to Applicant and 
his neighbors, and the assault charges were dismissed due to the lack of credibility of 
any of the witnesses. (GE 8; AE G.) 
 
 On January 3, 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI). He refused to participate in the field sobriety test or the breathalyzer 
test when requested to do so by the arresting officer. He admits that he was intoxicated 
at the time. On January 11, 2016, he pled, “no contest,” to the DUI charge, and was 
given a six-month continued sentence with unsupervised probation and fined $719. He 
was also fined $119 for the citation that led to his initial traffic stop. He successfully 
completed his probationary period and all other court-ordered DUI evaluations and 
classes. After imposing an additional $150 in administrative fees, the municipal court 
handling this case dismissed the charges on June 28, 2016. (Answer; GE 7; AE H; 
Tr.95-105.)  
 
 When Applicant applied for his current position with the defense contractor, he 
did not disclose his recent arrest history to avoid adversely affecting his chances of 
being hired. At the time of his hearing, he had still not informed his supervisors or 
workplace security personnel about these incidents. When he completed Section 22 
(Police Record) of his February 2015 e-QIP (GE 1), he disclosed that during January 
2015 he had been, “Pulled over for suspected DUI,” but checked, “No,” when asked if 
he had been charged, convicted, or was currently awaiting trial and/or ordered to 
appear in court as a result of that DUI offense. He explained, “I have not been cited, nor 
convicted, nor am I awaiting trial. I am waiting to see what they want me to do.” He then 
responded, “No,” to the subsequent question that asked if he had any other offenses in 
the past seven years for which he had, among other things, been issued a summons to 
appear in court, been arrested, or been charged. He also responded, “No,” to the next 
question that asked if, other than the offense already listed (the DUI), he had ever been 
charged with any felony offense or charged with any offense involving firearms. He 
claimed that he was not deliberately falsifying or omitting relevant information in these 
responses because he had called some unidentified group of security clearance lawyers 
he found on the internet and was advised that he should answer these questions in this 
manner after he explained the status of his charges. This testimony was not credible. 
(Answer; GE 1; Tr. 69-74, 82-86, 95-105, 107-128.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant had a charged-off $7,045 credit card 
account that remained delinquent. Applicant denied that this was his account, and 
claimed it probably belonged to one of several other of his family members with the 
same or very similar names. He successfully disputed the debt to the credit reporting 
agency that issued the report on which the allegation was based, and provided 
documentation corroborating this fact. (Answer; GE 5; GE 6; AE D; Tr. 75-78, 87-95.) 
    
 
 
 
 
4 
 Two witnesses, who worked with Applicant a number of years ago and have kept 
in touch with him, described their high opinions of his character and integrity. They also 
provided letters expressing similar sentiments. Applicant’s supervisor also wrote a letter 
on his behalf, expressing her excellent opinion of his honesty, dependability, and 
trustworthiness. She expressed that, to the best of her knowledge, he had never broken 
any laws and had always been mindful of other people’s need for space, quiet, 
assistance, and privacy. She has trusted him with sensitive information and has found 
no reason to doubt or question him.  Applicant confirmed during his testimony that this 
was one of the supervisors from whom he had deliberately concealed his 2014 felony 
aggravated assault arrest and his 2015 DUI offense. (AE J; Tr. 32-64, 104-107, 112.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 establishes that an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
 
 
 
5 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant had a successful military career in the Army, but remained unemployed 
after his retirement until obtaining his current position in February 2015. He had been 
arrested for a DUI offense less than two months earlier, and for felony aggravated 
assault within the preceding nine months. He was concerned that this information about 
his conduct, if known, would affect his personal, professional, and community standing 
with respect to his prospective employment. He remained so concerned through the 
 
 
 
 
6 
date of his hearing, as evidenced by his continuing concealment of the information from 
his supervisors and company security officials. When he completed and certified the 
truth of his e-QIP in February 2015, he provided minimal disclosure concerning his 
admittedly valid and pending DUI charges, and completely omitted any information 
about his June 2014 felony aggravated assault arrest and charges. This evidence 
establishes that his omission and concealment of relevant facts on the security 
questionnaire were deliberate, and his conduct made him vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. Substantial security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e) 
were accordingly raised, shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate such concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes five conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that would support mitigation under any of the 
foregoing conditions. Within the nine months preceding his e-QIP submission, he was 
arrested and charged with felony aggravated assault and DUI. This is serious 
misconduct with respect to his national security eligibility, which he knew placed his 
personal and professional standing in jeopardy. He has concealed the information from 
his employer, creating serious and ongoing vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. He completely omitted the felony aggravated assault arrest and charges 
from the e-QIP, and made neither prompt nor good-faith efforts to disclose it before 
being confronted during OPM interviews, as admitted during his hearing testimony. 
Applicant asserted that some unidentifiable source of free legal advice concerning 
 
 
 
 
7 
security clearance issues advised him that he need not disclose this information. His 
testimony in this regard was not credible, and was insufficient to demonstrate that the 
source undertook his legal representation or was otherwise professionally responsible 
for providing him such advice. These were serious offenses, concerning which his 
attempted concealment is ongoing, casting doubt on his present reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. He demonstrated no positive steps to alleviate these 
circumstances or reduce the resulting vulnerability to exploitation and duress. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had one allegedly delinquent $7,045 credit card debt that had been 
reported by one credit reporting bureau. He did not repay or otherwise satisfy this 
alleged debt. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline contains one condition in AG ¶ 20 that mitigates the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged delinquent debt:  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant successfully disputed the alleged delinquent debt on the basis that it 
had mistakenly been attributed to him. He provided documentation demonstrating that 
the credit bureau that had previously reported this delinquency accepted his position 
and deleted the account from his report. Potential security concerns arising from this 
debt were mitigated under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and 
educated adult, who is accountable for his choices that resulted in criminal charges that 
he attempted to conceal due to their adverse effects on his personal and professional 
standing. His friends provided strong character references, but their regular contact with 
him ended many years ago. His supervisor also praised him, but her opinion rested in 
substantial part on her ignorance of his recent criminal history. He had a successful 
military career, but there is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or acceptance of his 
obligation to be forthright concerning those personal issues that affect him 
professionally. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. 
Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
