KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A Judge is required to evaluate an applicant’s security concerns in light of the entirety
of the record evidence. Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 16-04053.a1
DATE: 09/19/2018
DATE: September 19, 2018
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-04053
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 23, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On June 19, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Candace Le’i Garcia denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the evidence; whether the Judge failed to apply  properly the mitigating conditions; and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 1985.  In 1999, Applicant’s wife quit her
job following the birth of a child.  After this, she and Applicant fell behind on their debts. 
Applicant’s financial problems were further exacerbated by delays in payments he received in his
Defense contracting business.  As a consequence of his difficulties, Applicant became
“overwhelmed.”  Decision at 3.  He failed to pay his quarterly taxes and to file his tax returns for
2005 through 2014.  The IRS entered two liens against Applicant, for nearly $287,000 and $270,000
respectively.  His state taxing authority entered a lien of nearly $98,000 against him as well.  In
2016, the IRS entered a third lien against Applicant.
Applicant was not satisfied with the quality of work he received from an accountant who
prepared his taxes for him in 2004, nor with the work of a tax firm he hired in 2009.  He also
consulted with another individual to assist him, to no avail.  He finally enlisted the aid of a tax
attorney.  Applicant has entered into an Offer in Compromise (OIC) with the IRS, and he has made
payments in order to show good faith.  Once the OIC is accepted, Applicant will make monthly
payments of nearly $3,100 for two years, thereby resolving his Federal tax liability. Once this is
accepted, Applicant expects to begin resolving his outstanding state tax liabilities.  Applicant filed
his delinquent Federal and state income tax returns in early 2016.
Applicant’s wife returned to work in 2010 and earns about $50,000 a year as of the date of
the hearing.  Applicant has no retirement plans, savings, or other assets.  As of the hearing he was
delinquent on his mortgage payment.  Applicant has been “conservative” with his estimated tax
withholdings since 2016, and he makes monthly, rather than quarterly, payments.  Applicant and his
wife have a budget and, although they have not received financial counseling, they have benefitted
from the advice of his tax attorney and the tax company.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge noted that, although Applicant has filed his returns, he still has a significant
amount of unresolved tax debt.  She concluded that Applicant’s finances are not yet under control
and there is insufficient evidence to permit a conclusion that they are unlikely to recur.  She also
found that there is insufficient evidence of responsible action in regard to Applicant’s tax problems. 
She noted, for example, that he did not become actively involved in resolving his problems until late
2015 and that he did not hire his current tax attorney until mid-2016.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence in the record.  He cites,
for example, to his OIC with the IRS, his having filed his tax returns, and what he terms the unique
circumstances underlying his problems.  Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut the
presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor are they sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).
Applicant contends that the Judge did not extend appropriate weight to mitigating condition
20(g).1  He cites to evidence of his OIC and his having filed his tax returns.  The judge is correct that
20(g) does not apply to the record in Applicant’s case.  The first prong of 20(g) is that the individual
has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority.  As of the close of the record, no such
arrangements were in place.  Of course, even under mitigating condition 20(g), a Judge is entitled
to consider the circumstances underlying an applicant’s tax problems.  Indeed, a Judge is required
to evaluate an applicant’s security concerns in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018).  Mere belated filing, in and of itself, may
not be enough to establish mitigation within the meaning of the Directive.  In this case, the Judge
made rather extensive findings about Applicant’s circumstances, particularly evidence that he
became “overwhelmed” by his tax problems.  Nevertheless, the Judge concluded Applicant waited
until relatively late to begin seriously to address his financial issues.  We find nothing in the
Decision or in the record that would undermine the Judge’s analysis of the mitigating conditions. 
We resolve this issue adversely to Applicant.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not perform an adequate whole-person analysis. 
However, we conclude that the Judge satisfied the requirements of the Directive in that she
evaluated Applicant’s financial concerns in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No.
17-01291 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2018).  We give due consideration to the case that Applicant
has cited.  However, Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judge’s
nor on the Appeal Board.  Each case must be decided on its own merits.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
17-02391 at 4. 
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
1Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g): “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority
to file or pay the amount and is in compliance with those arrangements.” 
3
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
 
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                    
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
