 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03674 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests and delinquent debts. He failed 
to mitigate the resulting financial and alcohol security concerns. Based on the record 
evidence, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On December 16, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information or eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective 
within the DoD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 24, 2018, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On March 9, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing 10 Items, was mailed to Applicant on March 12, 2018, and received by him on 
March 30, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt 
of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, 
did not file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond 
beyond the 30-day period he was afforded. All Government’s Items are admitted into the 
record without objections. The case was assigned to me on July 30, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and a high school graduate. He is unmarried and has one 
child. He attended college between August 2006 and November 2008. (Item 3) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant admitted his history of criminal arrests and charges related to the 
consumption of alcohol as alleged in the SOR. In September 2014, he was arrested and 
charged with driving under the influence (DUI), 1st offense. He was found guilty. His 
driver’s license was restricted for one year, and he was ordered to attend an alcohol 
substance abuse program (ASAP). He had an interlock device installed in his car for six 
months. His blood alcohol content (BAC) was .14% at the time of his arrest. He was 27 
years old. (Items 2, 4, 5)  
 
 In April 2016, Applicant was charged with DUI 2nd within 5 years, reckless driving, 
refusal, and hit and run. He was convicted of DUI 2nd, reckless driving, and refusal. The 
hit and run charge was dismissed. He was sentenced to two years of probation and 
ordered to again attend ASAP. His driver’s license was suspended for one year. (Items 
2, 4, 6)  
 
 In October 2016, Applicant was charged with DUI 2nd within 5 years, failure to 
maintain control (reckless driving), and no valid driver’s license. He was convicted of DUI 
2nd within 5 years, and the other two charges were not prosecuted. He was placed on 
probation for three years and his license was suspended. His BAC was .23% when 
arrested and over the legal limit. (Items 2, 4, 7) 
 
 In March 2017, Applicant began alcohol treatment for the two 2016 convictions. 
He was diagnosed with a severe alcohol use disorder. In June 2017, he tested positive 
for alcohol and the court extended his treatment until at least May 2018. (Item 1) After a 
second positive alcohol test in September 2017, his treatment program was extended for 
16 weeks and the number of weekly sessions increased. According to his case manager’s 
December 2017 letter, Applicant subsequently was required to attend 81 sessions of 
treatment in 52 weeks. (Items 2, 4, 8) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 During an interview in June 2017 with a government investigator, Applicant said 
he recognized that he has a problem with alcohol. At that time, he said he had not had a 
drink since October 2016, and he did not intend to drink in the future. (Item 4) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Based on credit reports from January 2016 and September 2017, The SOR alleged 
21 debts that became delinquent between 2011 and 2016, and totaled $30,031. Applicant 
admitted all of the debts, except those alleged in ¶¶ 2.f ($1,020); 2.n (no amount listed); 
2.o (no amount alleged); 2.p ($2,587); and 2.q (no amount listed). Applicant denied those 
debts and stated that he had either made a payment or settled them. He provided no 
documentary evidence that specifically confirmed his assertions for those five debts. (Item 
2) 
 
 Applicant submitted state verifications that he received unemployment benefits for 
2010 and 2011, which is a reason that contributed to his financial problems. (Item 4) He 
provided documentation that he engaged a debt relief law firm in October 2013 to resolve 
his debts. That agreement included seven creditors, who were owed $20,812. Some of 
those creditors are alleged in the SOR. In April 2015, Applicant paid off a loan owed to a 
financial service creditor. (Item 2) It is not clear whether that creditor is listed in the SOR. 
He submitted a January 2018 credit report, asserting that it contained proof that he paid 
some debts, but did not identify them. That credit report continued to document many 
unpaid debts. No other information was provided specifically pertinent to the status or 
resolution of the 21 debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
 
 
 
 
4 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following three may potentially apply:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant was arrested and convicted of three DUI offenses, as he was inebriated 
and over the legal limit for driving after consuming alcohol. He admitted that he was 
diagnosed with a severe alcohol abuse disorder at a substance abuse facility. The 
evidence establishes the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline. Four may potentially apply: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Sufficient time has not passed since Applicant last consumed alcohol, which, 
according to this record, was in September 2017 while he was in treatment. He 
acknowledged his problems with alcohol, but has not demonstrated a significant pattern 
of either modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) do not apply. In December 2017, Applicant’s 
case manager stated that Applicant’s treatment period had been extended to May 2018 
and the number of weekly sessions were increased as a result of his relapses There is 
insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 23 (c) or 23(d), as there is no 
evidence regarding his progress or successful completion of a treatment program and 
compliance with any additional recommendations.  
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Three may be 
potentially disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to satisfy debts, beginning in 
2011 and continuing to date. The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline includes a condition in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts. The following potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant’s financial problems are longstanding and remain ongoing. He presented 
evidence that he was unemployed for a period of time in 2010 and 2011; however, there 
is no evidence explaining that his unemployment was the result of circumstances beyond 
his control, and that he acted financially responsible under those circumstances. He hired 
a debt repair firm to resolve his debts, but he did not provide information showing that his 
financial problems are under control. He did not present sufficient evidence that he has 
resolved or is resolving the alleged debts through a good-faith effort. Accordingly, 
mitigation of financial concerns was not established under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), or 
20(d). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a mature 
adult and is accountable for the decisions that led to his history of alcohol-related incidents 
and financial problems. He failed to demonstrate sufficient rehabilitation to mitigate the 
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness that are raised by his pattern 
of misconduct and irresponsibility. He did not show that continuation or recurrence of 
financial issues is unlikely, or establish reduced potential for pressure, coercion, or duress 
arising therefrom.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
       Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
       Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant 
         
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
        Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.u:      Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                        
 
         
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
