 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-00213 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
  For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esquire, Department Counsel 
     For Applicant: David P. Shelton, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E Personal 
Conduct).1 In a June 26, 2017, response, Applicant answered the allegations and 
requested a hearing based on the written record. The Government later converted the 
requested action into a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned the case on May 10, 2018.  
 
A June 1, 2018, notice was issued which set the hearing for June 20, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered seven documents, 
accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-7. Applicant offered 
testimony, introduced one witness, and offered 15 exhibits, accepted without objection 
as Exs. A-O. The record was held open through July 3, 2018, in the event either party 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Subsequently amended, the AG applied 
here are applicable for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
wished to submit additional materials. With no new documentation received, the record 
was closed on July 3, 2018. Based on the testimony, materials, and record as a whole, I 
find Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old help desk information technician who has worked for 
the same entity for twelve-and-a-half years. After the recent sale of his employing 
company, Applicant had his former salary of about $72,000 reduced to about $60,000 a 
year. He has held a security clearance since 2005.2 (Tr. 33) For the past 18 years, he 
has maintained a second job in pizza delivery, which currently generates about $12,000 
a year. (Tr. 32-33) The regional director for his primary employer spoke of Applicant in 
the highest terms and urges that Applicant’s security clearance be reinstated. (Tr. 71-
74) He characterized Applicant as being big-hearted, well-liked, and a superior 
employee. Similarly favorable recommendations were received from others who know 
Applicant. (Exs. E-G) 
 
In 1985, Applicant began active duty service in the United States Army, where he 
served for three years. This was followed by 16 months as an inactive reservist, 
followed by another 16 months as an active reservist, before he received an other-than-
honorable discharge. (Tr. 30-31) Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree in computer 
information systems. Divorced in 1989, he is the father of two adult children. 
 
 At the age of 15, Applicant and a friend began imbibing alcohol on the way to a 
party. His drinking became problematic after he joined the military in 1985, the same 
year he was first cited for driving under the influence. (Tr. 25) Around the same time, 
between about 1986 and 1990, he was cited for such alcohol-related charges as public 
intoxication and battery. (Tr. 53-56) These included domestic assault and battery. To 
get the “monkey off [his] back,” he sought treatment and began using Antabuse to “get 
off the drinking over the years.”3 (Tr. 19, 59) He became sober in February 1993 after 
completing an outpatient addiction program that lasted about one year. (Tr. 19, 59)  The 
recommendation was that Applicant abstain from imbibing. (Tr. 61) For nearly a decade 
thereafter, he volunteered at shelters for homeless alcoholics. (Tr. 61-62) 
 
 Despite his clean living, Applicant encountered trouble when he met a foreign 
woman in about 2012, when he was working in pizza delivery. The mother of four young 
boys, she and Applicant began a romantic relationship. Although she looked for steady 
work, a problem with alcohol kept her from maintaining gainful employment. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant thought he could help her with her drinking problem. (Tr. 62) After meeting 
                                                          
2 In his October 2015 Security Clearance Application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that his previous SCA 
was from March 2003. In discussing that security clearance in 2015, he noted, “I do IT for the 
government,” in the present tense, suggesting he held a security clearance at that time. (See Ex. 1 at 47 
of 53). 
 
3  Antabuse (Disulfiram) is a drug used to support the treatment of chronic alcoholism by producing an 
acute sensitivity to ethanol (drinking alcohol). See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disulfiram. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
her, he relapsed and began drinking beer. (Tr. 65) During their time together, he helped 
pay for the woman to bring to the U.S. three of her sons she had left behind in Central 
America, then began supporting the entire family as his own. Although it led him to be 
financially over-extended, he helped her out because “she needed help.” (Tr. 36) 
 
In July 2014, Applicant and the woman went to the beach to celebrate 
Independence Day. The woman began the celebration by buying a bottle of tequila; 
Applicant eventually treated himself to “some wine.” (Tr. 22) Later that evening, 
Applicant bought the woman a bottle of tequila. (Tr. 64) As he was driving his vehicle 
home, he pulled over so the woman could relieve herself by the side of the road.  
 
A passing police officer noted the vehicle off the road and approached the 
couple. Applicant volunteered that he had consumed some wine, and a sobriety test 
ensued. Applicant believed he had passed the examination tests until he lost his 
balance on the “one-leg thing.” (Tr. 24, 66) He failed that part of the sobriety exam.4 (Tr. 
66) Applicant did not feel impaired. (Tr. 24) The officer took him to the police station and 
his vehicle was towed. Ultimately, he was booked and sent home in a cab.  
  
 Applicant was charged with driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI), negligent driving, and attempting to drive while impaired (ADWI). The first two 
charges were nolle prossed and Applicant pled guilty to the third charge. He did not 
contest the charge because he was happy with his life at the time and did not want to 
“be bothered with the law anymore” or miss work commuting to the far away 
courthouse, even though his counsel said he could “beat this case.” (Tr. 25) He pled 
guilty because he “just wanted to get it over with.” (Tr. 25) The incident did, however, 
prompt Applicant to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) for six months as a “kind of once 
every week recovery.” (Tr. 25-26; see also Tr. 65-67) Applicant has not consumed 
alcohol since July 5, 2014. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant and the woman ended their relationship on Christmas Eve, 2014.5 (Tr. 
21) Applicant was not overly forlorn as, by then, Applicant considered her to be “a 
nightmare.” (Tr. 21) During their time together, however, Applicant made poor financial 
decisions in order to support her and her boys. He had been borrowing money to 
supplement his income. Things began to turn around when he and the woman broke up.  
 
In June 2016, Applicant was interviewed by a Department of Defense 
investigator. In discussing the June 2014 incident, Applicant stated that he had passed 
all of the field sobriety tests, neglecting to mention his failure of the “one-leg thing.” 
During that interview, he also reported that he had not consumed any alcohol between 
1992 and the night of the July 2014 DUI incident, despite the fact he had commenced 
drinking alcohol again in 2012. He “protected [his] recovery over the application 
                                                          
4 Applicant had told one of the two officers that he was not impaired. Until this part of the tests, Applicant 
thought he was passing the exam. He admits that he failed this final portion of the exam. (Tr. 66)  
 
5 Elsewhere, Applicant reflected that the break-up might have occurred in December 2015. (Tr. 35) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
[process]” in order to sustain the appearance his recovery is his top priority, and as a 
way to avoid intermingling with those who imbibe. (Tr. 28)  
 
At issue in the SOR are seven delinquent debts (allegations 1.a-1.g). In sum, 
they amount to approximately $50,000. He has resolved the credit card balances 
reflected at allegations 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g, representing about $5,000. This leaves 
allegations 1.a-1.c and 1.e at issue.6 (Tr. 37)  
 
The debt at allegation 1.a is part of a repayment program, noted below, but no 
payments have yet been made toward its $21,162 balance.7 (Tr. 42) That is also the 
case with the $1,796 debt noted at allegation 1.e. (Tr. 43) Applicant’s credit reports 
reflect he has been in repayment on the debts at 1.b and 1.c. (Tr. 38) The debt at 
allegation 1.b has been reduced from $15,429 to about $5,400, while the debt noted at 
allegation 1.c has been reduced from about $10,350 to $3,700 over the past few years. 
(Tr. 39-41; Ex. 4) The account balance owed for the debt at allegation 1.e for $1,796 is 
also being handled by Applicant’s debt consolidator, discussed below. While no 
payments have yet been made on this account, the consolidator is preparing to 
negotiate a settlement on the balance. (Tr. 43) 
 
Applicant is currently in a program to consolidate his delinquent debts in an effort 
to find relief from his debt. He entered that program in May 2015 with nine accounts, of 
which five have since been satisfied. (Tr. 26) Toward that program, Applicant pays 
about $1,041 per month. (Tr. 37) Remaining are his largest delinquent debts (including 
1.a and 1.e), which he hopes to satisfy within the next two years, and a debt regarding 
which Applicant is seeking renegotiation of terms to reduce the balance owed. (Tr. 26-
27) To date, he has paid the debt consolidator about $37,000. (Tr. 27-28) His strategy is 
to continue with the debt repayment plan until all debts are satisfied.  
 
Applicant has no notable debts outside of the debt consolidation plan. He is 
current on his regular monthly obligations. Applicant has a checking account with a 
current balance of about $2,200 and he maintains a 401k account with a balance of 
nearly $20,000. After all monthly expenses, Applicant has a net remainder of about 
$100-$150, which he retains in his checking account. Last year, he purchased a used 
vehicle to replace his 10-year-old SUV requiring costly repairs. (Tr. 50) He has not 
taken a vacation in seven years, nor has he made any other major purchases. Applicant 
maintains a budget in his head; he has not received financial counseling. He plans to 
continue with his second job in food delivery. 
 
 
                                                          
6 As correctly noted by Department Counsel, Applicant’s credit report reflects that the three accounts with 
this creditor are now shown in Applicant’s credit report as having a zero balance. In making this comment, 
however, Department Counsel accidently referenced the accounts at allegations 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f, instead 
of 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g., which each pertain to the same creditor. (Tr. 37) 
 
7 Applicant believes his debt relief program, discussed below, is waiting to renegotiate the terms on the 
debts at allegations 1.a and 1.e. (Tr. 43) He believes this may occur by the end of 2018. (Tr. 44) He has 
left the management of the debts within that program to the consolidator professionals. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to the AG, 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept, each of which must be fully considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility and will be 
resolved in favor of the national security. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only 
those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the record evidence. 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Decisions are in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
The Government offered documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant has 
several delinquent debts. This raises financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Four conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There are multiple delinquent debts at issue, debts dating back to his relationship 
with the mother of three boys that took place between 2012 and 2014. It was during this 
time he incurred debt in an effort to rescue this woman from her problems and support 
her family. While this particular woman may now be out of the picture, it does not 
necessarily mean Applicant, noted for being big-hearted, will not again try to help 
another individual in distress to his economic detriment. Moreover, his financial 
assistance was clearly of his choosing, and not a form of benevolence caused by fraud 
or some factor outside of his control. Consequently, neither AG ¶ 20(a) nor AG ¶ 20(b) 
apply. Because he has not sought financial counseling, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did, however, provide evidence that he has initiated and successfully 
implemented meaningful efforts to address his delinquent debt. Although no progress 
has yet been made on the debt at 1.a, it was incorporated into his debt repayment plan 
along with the debt cited at allegation 1.e.  His credit reports reflect he has been in 
repayment on the debts at 1.b and 1.c. and made significant progress on reducing the 
balances owed. The parties agreed that he has resolved the credit card balances 
reflected at allegations 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g.  Today, Applicant is living within his means and 
retaining a monthly net remainder. He has a retirement account. His needs are not 
extravagant. With his reasonable strategy successfully in place, AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
 
 
 
7 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or 
concealing or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical or mental 
health professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a 
national security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative, and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
 
In June 2016, Applicant told a Department of Defense investigator he had 
passed all of the field sobriety tests related to his July 2014 drinking and driving 
incident, although he has since acknowledged that he failed the final task (“one-leg 
thing”) in the battery of physical tests administered by the police. In addition, he 
intentionally sought to put himself in a better light by stating he had not consumed any 
alcohol between 1992 and the night of the July 2014, although, in fact, he abandoned 
abstinence after he began his 2012-2014 relationship. While his intention was to protect 
his appearance of sobriety, his obfuscation betrayed the trust and candor expected of 
both those seeking a security clearance and those maintaining a security clearance.8  
Combined with his history of alcohol-related incidents, both AG ¶ 16(b) and AG ¶ 16(e) 
apply.    
 
I have considered these facts in light of the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
                                                          
8 Comments made at the hearing tend to show that Applicant maintained a security clearance at this time. 
 
 
 
 
8 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was cause or significantly contributed to by the advice of legal counsel or 
a person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
  
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
At best, Applicant’s resumption of AA after his DUI citation, renewed abstinence 
(since July 2014), and his openness regarding his alcohol abuse history shine positively 
with regard to AG ¶ 17(e) and, to a much lesser extent, AG ¶ 17(d), given the breakup 
from his former partner. However, the fact that Applicant’s renewed sobriety has only 
lasted four years, when the facts show he easily slipped from abstinence to alcohol use 
after a considerably longer period before, is worrisome. Of equal or greater concern, 
depending on whether he maintained a SCA in 2016, are his intentional falsities to a 
Department of Defense investigator concerning his alcohol-related driving citation and 
his misleading information regarding the length of his period of sobriety. In light of these 
sustained concerns, no other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the his  
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Here, I have considered those 
factors. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old help desk information technician who has worked for 
the same entity for twelve-and-a-half years. He has maintained a second job to 
supplement his income for 18 years. His combined income is about $72,000. He has 
 
 
 
 
9 
excellent references and recommendations, including an assessment by his regional 
director that Applicant is big-hearted, well-liked, and a superior employee.  
 
During a tumultuous and costly relationship, Applicant incurred considerable debt 
which later became delinquent. While his motives were clearly honorable in assisting his 
partner, the resultant delinquent debt raises security concerns. Applicant provided 
documentary evidence reflecting notable progress toward addressing the debts at issue. 
His devised strategy has been successful in addressing his debts, and it is his plan to 
continue with that approach until all delinquent debts are honored. He has the income to 
do so. Given such progress, financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Security concerns regarding personal conduct, however, remain. Applicant has 
been sober for about four years. In the past, he has maintained sobriety for more than 
that period, then relapsed. While he is now more mature, a period of at least five years 
would not be unreasonable for him to demonstrate true commitment to abstinence. 
More worrisome, however, is Applicant lack of candor with a Department of Defense 
investigator while being vetted for a security clearance renewal two years ago. The 
relationship between the government and one wishing access to secret or confidential 
information demands, and, indeed, is predicated upon complete candor. More than two 
years of issue-free personal conduct is needed to mitigate related security concerns 
under these facts.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
                                                     Administrative Judge 
