 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01140 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 19, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018. The 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
26, 2018, scheduling the hearing for April 26, 2018.  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s exhibit list, discovery 
letter, and administrative notice request were appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I, II, and III. Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through F. I overruled Department Counsel’s objection to portions of AE A and B 
that are in Chinese and admitted AE A and B in evidence, noting that I would not give 
any weight to those portions. I admitted AE C through F in evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 4, 2018.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the SOR allegations. She is a 25-year-old native-born U.S. 
citizen. She was raised in China from when she was several months old through age 
12, as her father worked there as a university teacher. She has since lived in the United 
States. As of the date of the hearing, she had never been married and she lived with her 
mother in her mother’s home.3        
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 2011 and obtained a bachelor’s degree 
in 2014. As of the date of the hearing, she was working on a master’s degree. She has 
worked as a digital communications specialist for a defense contractor since June 2015. 
She has never held a security clearance.4 
 
Applicant’s parents married in 1990 and divorced in 2012. Her father is a native-
born U.S. citizen and her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen; both reside in the United 
States. Her mother is from China, but she was studying in the United States when she 
met Applicant’s father. In August 2013, Applicant’s father remarried a Chinese citizen 
who has since resided with him in the United States. She is Applicant’s stepmother 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). They have one child, a minor. Applicant met her stepmother only a few 
times in 2004, when Applicant was in elementary school. She learned then that 
Applicant’s father was having an affair with this individual while married to her mother. 
She has since not had any contact with her stepmother. Applicant’s father testified that 
Applicant did not have a relationship with his wife or child, and he did not anticipate that 
Applicant and his wife would ever have one.5 
 
 Applicant’s father met his wife in China in 2004. She worked as a musician and 
a public school teacher in China, and she retired in 2007. She then became a partner in 
her brother’s clothing company in China, but sold her interest in the company when she 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 19-26. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 5-7, 82-84, 86-88; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 5-7, 9, 82-84, 86-88, 96; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 27-66, 81; GE 1; AE A. 
 
3 
 
immigrated to the United States in 2013. She has since been unemployed. In around 
2016, she sold her property in China. She also filed paperwork for her retirement 
benefits in China, but she has not received any such benefits since living in the United 
States. She became a permanent U.S. resident in July 2015. When she is eligible to 
become a U.S. citizen in 2020, she intends on doing so and terminating her Chinese 
citizenship. Applicant’s father testified that Applicant does not have any financial interest 
in his wife’s assets, and Applicant has never met his wife’s family in China.6  
 
Applicant’s father testified that he sees Applicant “quite often,” around twice 
monthly. They meet for lunch or dinner. He also testified that he does not discuss the 
nature of Applicant’s work with anyone, to include his wife. He testified that he would 
report to U.S. authorities any attempt by the Chinese government or military to exert 
pressure on him or his wife, to in turn exert pressure on Applicant to reveal classified 
information.7  
 
Applicant has maternal family members who are citizens and residents of China 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). She has two uncles, ages 65 (Uncle A) and 63 (Uncle B), both of whom 
are married. She also has two cousins, ages 34 (Cousin A) and 29 (Cousin B); Cousin 
A is married. Applicant first met her family in China when she lived there as a child. 
Uncle A, Uncle B, and their wives are retired; Uncle B retired from a 
telecommunications company. Cousin A is a small business owner. Cousin B attended 
school in the United States from 2008 to 2015 and received his bachelor’s degree from 
a U.S. university; he has since lived and worked in finance in China. Applicant and 
Applicant’s father’s testified that none of these family members have previously been or 
are currently affiliated with the Chinese government or military.8 
 
Applicant primarily and frequently communicates with her family in China 
electronically, through a group chat application. They communicate telephonically 
during certain holidays. She traveled to China to visit them in 2006, 2008, and 2011, 
using her U.S. passport and a visa issued by the Chinese embassy in the United States. 
She anticipates visiting them in China in the future. She does not send any money or 
gifts to her family in China and they do not send her any money or gifts. She has not 
sponsored any of her family in China to the United States, as that has been done by her 
mother. Uncle A and his wife visited the United States in 2013 and 2015, when their 
son, Cousin B, attended school in the United States. Uncle B visited Applicant’s mother 
in the United States in 2016. Applicant’s father testified that Applicant’s relationship with 
her maternal family in China did not pose a threat to U.S. national security.9 
 
At the time of her background interview, Applicant was dating an individual who 
worked in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for a UAE corporation (SOR ¶ 1.c). She met 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 27-66, 81; GE 1; AE A, F. 
 
7 Tr. at 54-5560-61; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-66, 79-81, 84-86, 88-96; GE 1; AE B, E. 
 
9 Tr. at 27-66, 79-81, 84-86, 88-96; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
and began dating him when they attended the same college. They made a mutual 
decision to end their relationship in late 2016 due to cultural differences and distance. 
She has not since had any contact with him.10 
 
Applicant described herself as a hard worker. She speaks Mandarin and some 
Arabic. She testified that she would report to U.S. authorities any attempts to blackmail 
her. She does not have any foreign financial interests or any expectation of inheriting 
any such interests. Her assets in the United States total $20,000.11 
 
In addition to her father, Applicant’s close friend since 2006 testified at the 
hearing. They first met because they were neighbors. As of the date of the hearing, the 
witness held a public trust clearance since 2014. She and Applicant spoke often, saw 
each other a few times monthly, and celebrated holidays together on occasion. She 
testified that Applicant had no relationship with her stepmother. She testified that 
Applicant electronically communicated with her family in China weekly and last visited 
them in China in 2011. She testified that none of them were affiliated with the Chinese 
government or military, and she did not believe Applicant’s relationship with them posed 
any threat to U.S. national security. She also testified that she was aware of Applicant’s 
college ex-boyfriend, with whom Applicant has not had contact since late 2016. She 
testified that Applicant is loyal to the United States and would undoubtedly report any 
blackmail attempts on her to the proper authorities.12 
 
China  
 
 The National Counterintelligence Executive has identified China as among the 
most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic information and technology. China’s 
intelligence services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to 
exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or email.  
Chinese attempts to collect U.S. economic and technological information will continue at 
a high level and will represent a growing threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of 
the cyber threat will evolve with continuing technological advances in the global 
information environment. China’s military modernization is targeting capabilities with the 
potential to degrade core U.S. military-technological advances.  
 
 China is an authoritarian state in which the Chinese Community Party is the 
paramount authority, with its members holding almost all top government and security 
apparatus positions. Repression and coercion of organizations and individuals involved 
in civil and political rights advocacy as well as in public interest and ethnic minority 
issues remained severe. Citizens have limited forms of redress against official abuse. 
Humans rights concerns observed in 2016 included illegal detention, torture and 
coerced confessions of prisoners, and detention and harassment of journalists, lawyers, 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 81-82, 89; GE 1; AE C, D. 
 
11 Tr. at 27-66, 82-84, 88-92; GE 1. 
 
12 Tr. at 68-79. 
 
5 
 
writers, bloggers, dissidents, petitioners, and others whose actions the authorities 
deemed unacceptable. There was also a lack of due process in judicial proceedings, 
political control of courts and judges, extrajudicial disappearance of citizens, restrictions 
of nongovernmental organizations, and discrimination against women, minorities, and 
persons with disabilities. Authorities continued to censor and tightly control public 
discourse on the internet, in print, and in other media. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms, offices, cars, taxis, telephones, internet usage, and fax 
machines may be monitored onsite or remotely. Personal possessions in hotel rooms, 
including computers, may be searched without knowledge or consent.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
6 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
 
7 
 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government.  
 
Applicant has not had any contact with her college ex-boyfriend since late 2016. 
None of the disqualifying conditions apply as to Applicant’s ex-boyfriend. I find SOR ¶ 
1.c in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Applicant’s stepmother is a Chinese citizen. Applicant only met her stepmother a 
few times in 2004, has not since had any contact with her stepmother, and does not 
anticipate ever having a relationship with her stepmother. However, Applicant and her 
father see each other quite often, and Applicant’s stepmother resides with Applicant’s 
father in the United States. Applicant’s stepmother and father also have a child 
together.  
 
Applicant’s maternal family members are citizens and residents of China. 
Applicant and her father do not believe any of them are affiliated with the Chinese 
government. However, Applicant maintains frequent electronic communication with 
them. They have also visited both Applicant and her mother in the United States as 
recently as 2015 and 2016. While Applicant last visited them in China in 2011, she 
anticipates visiting them in China in the future.  AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply to SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b.   
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which  
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
 
8 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s stepmother is a Chinese citizen and Applicant’s maternal family are 
citizens and residents of China. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the 
reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b).   
 
While Applicant has not visited her family in China since 2011, they have visited 
her and her mother in the United States as recently as 2015 and 2016. She anticipates 
visiting them in China in the future. Applicant also maintains regular, electronic contact 
with them. AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. She has lived in the United States since 
she was 12 years old. She obtained her high-school diploma and bachelor’s degree in 
the United States. She was working on her master’s degree in the United States as of 
the date of the hearing. She has worked for a U.S. defense contractor since 2015. Her 
mother, with whom she lives, is a U.S. citizen and resident. She does not have any 
foreign financial interests or any expectation of inheriting any such interests. Her 
assets in the United States total $20,000. AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under this 
guidelines, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
