 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03261 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 1, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 6, 2018. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 (Items 1-2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 
16, 2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In May 2018, Applicant submitted exhibits (AE) A-
J, which were admitted without objection. Items 3-6 are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on August 28, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. The admissions 
are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since February 
2014. He is married with no children. He holds a bachelor’s degree.1  
  
 The SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts totaling approximately $13,812. The debts 
are supported by credit reports from October 2016 and August 2017; Applicant’s 
statement to a defense investigator in August 2017; his answers to interrogatories in 
December 2017; and his SOR admissions.2 
 
 Applicant claimed the reason for his financial distress was because in 2011, his 
first job out of college paid less than he anticipated because it was commissioned-
based. He became overextended when he purchased a car, rented an apartment, and 
purchased consumer goods. When he could not make his monthly payments, the 
accounts became delinquent. The current status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (car repossession debt-$6,251). Credit reports show that the last 
action taken on this debt was in April 2012. Applicant waited until January 2018 to 
contact the creditor about this debt. The creditor indicated the account was closed and 
charged off. Applicant documented receiving an IRS 1099-C, cancellation of debt form. 
He also claims that he recently looked into paying the debt even though it was charged 
off, but found out this debt is barred by the state statute of limitations.3 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.b (credit card debt-$2,904). Credit reports show that the last action 
taken on this debt was in May 2012. Applicant claims that once he received the SOR, 
he contacted the creditor who indicated the account was closed and charged off. He 
was told the debt was beyond the state statute of limitations for collections. This 
account is unresolved.4 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3. 
 
2 Items 2-6. 
 
3 Item 2, 5-6; AE A. 
 
4 Items 2, 5-6; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.e (rental property debts-$1,718; $500). These debts arose 
when Applicant became delinquent on his rent payments and was eventually evicted 
from his apartment. These debts went delinquent in 2012. Applicant claims that once he 
received the SOR, he contacted the creditor and set up a payment plan making $25 
monthly payments. He documented two months’ worth of payments in December 2017 
and February 2018. His May 2018 FORM response (AE A-J) did not include 
documentation of additional monthly payments on these debts. These accounts are 
unresolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d (rental property debt of $975). This debt arose when Applicant 
became delinquent on his rent payments. This debts went delinquent in 2012. Applicant 
claims that once he received the SOR, he contacted the creditor, made an initial $50 
payment, and set up a payment to pay $25 monthly. He documented one payment. His 
May 2018 FORM response (AE A-J) did not include documentation of additional 
monthly payments on this debt. This account is unresolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f (credit card debt-$488). Applicant acquired this credit card to help 
pay off accumulated debt. This account went delinquent in 2014. Upon receiving the 
SOR, Applicant contacted the creditor and established a payment plan. He documented 
making three monthly payments of approximately $92 in March, April, and May of 2018. 
This account is being resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g (cell phone debt-$392). Credit reports show that the last action taken 
on this debt was in 2014. Applicant claims that once he received the SOR, he contacted 
the creditor. He was told the debt was beyond the state statute of limitations for 
collections. This account is unresolved.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h (utility debt of $975). This debt is from the utilities company 
Applicant used when he was renting one of the properties listed above. He failed to pay 
the utilities and they became delinquent in 2012. Applicant claims that once he received 
the SOR, he contacted the creditor and set up a payment plan to pay $25 monthly. He 
documented one payment in February 2018. His May 2018 FORM response (AE A-J) 
did not include documentation of additional monthly payments on this debt. This 
account is unresolved.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i (utility debt-$236). This debt is from the utilities company Applicant 
used when he was renting one of the properties listed above. He failed to pay the 
utilities and they became delinquent in 2012. Applicant claims that once he received the 
                                                          
5 Item 2; AE A-J. 
 
6 Item 2; AE A-J. 
 
7 Item 2; AE A, E-J. 
 
8 Items 2, 6. 
 
9 Item 2, 6; AE A-J. 
 
4 
 
 
SOR, he contacted the creditor and set up a payment plan. He documented making two 
payments of $117 and settling this account in March 2018. This account is resolved.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j (credit card debt-$537). Applicant acquired this credit card to 
purchase clothing after graduating from college. This account went delinquent in 2012. 
Upon receiving the SOR, Applicant contacted the creditor and was told the account was 
closed. This account is unresolved.11 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal budget showing a monthly net remainder of 
between $284 and $1,044 each month. His father is making his monthly student loan 
payments of approximately $368, pursuant to his father agreeing to pay for Applicant’s 
college costs. Applicant provided documentation that he has paid non-SOR accounts in 
the past, which I have considered. There is no evidence of financial counseling.12 
 
 Applicant presented his 2018 performance appraisal where he was rated as 
“above average.”13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
10 Item 2, 6; AE A-D. 
 
11 Item 2, 5. 
 
12 Item 2 (enclosures 1, 3, and additional information). 
 
13 Item 2 (enclosure 2). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid and unresolved. I find all 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented evidence that in approximately 2012 his income was 
insufficient to meet his living expenses, which contributed to his delinquent debts. He 
did not present sufficient evidence to show that his subsequent actions to deal with his 
debts were responsible under the circumstances. He failed to contact any of his 
 
7 
 
 
creditors until the issuance of his SOR in January 2018. While he settled one debt (1.i), 
has made three payments toward another debt (1.f), and made initial payments toward 
the three rental debts (1.c-1.e), he failed to show his follow-up action on these debts. I 
find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. There is no evidence of financial counseling and there 
is insufficient evidence to show that the debts are under control or being resolved. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not fully apply. His delayed action in contacting the creditors and his minimal 
payments on the few debts that he is paying, does not establish a good-faith effort to 
repay or resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. There was no evidence 
presented disputing any of the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his struggles at a job 
which paid less than he anticipated and his recent positive performance evaluation. 
However, Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.f:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.i:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.j:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
