 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-03399  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 6, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 21, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP).  
On February 8, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse.  The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on March 20, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 6, 2018.  The Government offered two 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant offered no documentary exhibits at the hearing.  The record 
remained open to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting 
documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as 
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 
15, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 23 years old. He is unmarried with no children.  He has a bachelor’s 
degree in aerospace engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a 
Systems Test Engineer.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with 
his employment.   
 
 Applicant used marijuana on multiple occasions between August 2014 and June 
2017.  He was born in a small city that he describes as pretty ridden with drugs.  As a 
high school student he never consumed alcohol or used illegal drugs, but was focused 
on school and sports.  Applicant was a straight-A student and was admitted to an elite-
engineering University.  Once there, Applicant states that marijuana was a social thing, 
and he began using marijuana in 2014 as a sophomore in college.  He explained that 
college was a high stress environment, and a lot of his friends had been using it on the 
weekends to relax.  He used it, as a good release, about once a week at parties or with 
a group of friends at his fraternity house.  He states that his use of marijuana did not 
affect his school productivity, as he graduated with a 3.5 GPA.  (Applicant’s Post-
Hearing Exhibit A.)  He understood that it was not legal for him to use marijuana in the 
state in which he resided at that time, (Massachusetts) and he knew that it was against 
Federal law.   
 
 During the summers of 2015 and 2016, Applicant was hired as an intern for a 
defense contractor.  He applied for a security clearance in July 2016.  Applicant states 
that he did not use marijuana while working for the defense contractor.  However, he 
explained that he never failed a mandatory drug test conducted by his employer during 
his internship because he had no problem quitting his marijuana use, usually three 
months in advance, before he knew he had to take a drug test.  (Tr. p. 31.)  It was only 
when he went back to school that he used it.  In total, Applicant believes he used 
marijuana about 100 to 120 times.  (Tr. p. 24.)   His friends either gave it to him or he 
purchased it.  Applicant graduated from college in June 2017, and at that time he began 
working full time for his current employer.  He states that his marijuana use never had 
any negative impact on his work performance, finances, school work or personality.  He 
states that he has not used marijuana since June 2017, and that he has no future intent 
to use marijuana.  (Tr. p. 27.)   
 
 Applicant states that marijuana is no longer a part of his lifestyle.   He is very 
involved with outdoor activities.  He is now a rock climber, a cyclist and he enjoys 
 
 
3 
 
 
surfing.  Applicant candidly disclosed his use of marijuana on his security clearance 
application understanding that there could be negative repercussions.    
 
 A letter of reference from Applicant’s direct manager, who has worked with and 
known the Applicant since June 2017, indicates that he considers Applicant to be a 
valuable and high contributing member of the company.  Applicant’s attendance and 
punctuality has been outstanding, and he completes all tasks on time with minimal 
assistance.  He demonstrates leadership abilities in guiding and teaching the college 
interns.  He is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-hearing Exhibit 
A.)    
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive positon.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable: 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 It is noted that Applicant has made some changes in his lifestyle since graduating 
from college and joining the defense industry as a full-time employee.  His history of 
marijuana use from August 2014 through June 2017, however, continues to be against 
Federal law and DoD policy.  Applicant was working for a defense contractor during the 
summers of 2015 and 2016 and knew that his company policy prohibited the use of 
illegal drugs.  To avoid failing his mandatory drug tests administered by his employer, 
he strategically quit using marijuana about three months before he knew he would be 
subject to a drug test, and then returned to using it when he went back to college.  This 
history of illegal drug used shows his immaturity, poor judgment and unreliability.  
Applicant now states that he no longer intends to use marijuana, and there is no other 
evidence of marijuana use in the record since June 2017.  However, given his history 
and pattern of marijuana use over recent years, it cannot be determined that he will stop 
cold turkey or that he will use good judgment.  The likelihood that he will continue to use 
marijuana in the future is great.  At this time, it cannot be found that he is sufficiently 
responsible to access sensitive or classified information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. It is noted that Applicant 
revealed his illegal drug use on his security clearance application dated July 21, 2016, 
which is what he is expected to do.  Nevertheless, Applicant is a 23-year old adult, who 
is still young and immature.   From 2014 to 2017, he used marijuana, which he knew to 
be illegal.  He also used marijuana after having been granted an interim security 
clearance by the Department of Defense, and continued to use marijuana until June 
2017.  Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient responsibility on any level to be eligible 
for access to classified information.  Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
Drug Involvement. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a     Against Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
