 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03009 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from family connections in Iraq 
and from a federal tax lien. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, national 
security eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 23, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 19, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 3, 2017 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on January 26, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on March 14, 2018, setting the hearing for April 19, 2018. On April 6, 2018, 
DOHA issued an Amended Notice of Hearing, rescheduling the case to April 16, 2018. 
On that date, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objection, except GE 2.1 I granted Applicant’s request to 
leave the record open until June 4, 2018, to permit submission of additional evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 25, 2018. I extended that deadline for 
submission of post-hearing documents to June 25, 2018. He submitted post-hearing 
exhibits that I marked as AE D through AE J and admitted without objection. On July 12, 
2018, and August 31, 2018, Applicant submitted two additional exhibits. Department 
Counsel had no objections and I marked them as AE K and AE L. They are admitted. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq. Those facts are set forth in the 
following: Government’s Request for Administrative Notice for Iraq, marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1. These documents are included in the record. (Tr. 21-23) The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He was born in Iraq. He attended high school there and 
graduated with a bachelor’s degree from an Iraqi university in 1990. After graduation from 
the university, he was conscripted into the Iraqi army for two years. He then owned and 
operated a retail business for several years. (Tr. 23-27, 50) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns are based on Applicant’s four brothers, three 
sisters, an aunt, and two nephews, who are citizens and residents of Iraq. It also alleged 
a concern based on Appellant’s friendship with a citizen of Egypt. 
 
 In November 2000, Applicant fled Iraq after being tortured by the Saddam regime 
because he could not convince his father to support the government. At the time, he had 
                                            
1 GE 2 is Applicant’s Counterintelligence-focused Security Screening report, dated February 14, 2017.  
Applicant stated he had not reviewed this document although it had been timely sent to him by Department 
Counsel.  I instructed Applicant to review the document more carefully after the hearing and file any 
corrections or objections to the exhibit by the close of the record. I stated that I would consider them in my 
final decision. Applicant did not submit any post-hearing submissions listing corrections or objections to the 
exhibit. (Tr. 15-18) GE 2 is admitted.    
 
 
 
 
3 
a wife and four children. Before fleeing, he took his family to live with cousins in southern 
Iraq, and then he went to Syria. In July 2002, he obtained a refugee visa and moved to 
the United States. One of his brothers had previously obtained refugee status here after 
being tortured in Iraq. (Tr. 27-28; GE 2) Applicant has not spoken to that brother since 
2007. (Tr. 56) 
 
 After arriving in the United States in 2002, Applicant worked in a warehouse until 
September 2007, when he obtained a linguist position with a defense contractor and 
returned to Iraq. He did not see any of his relatives during this deployment. (Tr. 28-31; 
GE 2)  
  
 Applicant returned to the United States from Iraq in April 2008, and then became 
a naturalized citizen. In May 2008, he obtained a security clearance. In August 2008, he 
returned to Iraq as a higher level linguist with a different defense contractor. He remained 
there until September 2009. He did not visit family members living in Iraq during this 
deployment. (Tr. 58; GE 2) 
 
 From the end of his deployment in 2009 to sometime in 2013, Applicant was 
unemployed. He spent his time managing his U.S. investments and traveling to other 
Middle Eastern countries, looking for business opportunities. In September 2009, he 
moved to Egypt and rented an apartment. While there, he had a serious accident and 
broke both legs. (Tr. 34) He subsequently developed a relationship with a caretaker. He 
communicates with her twice a year over the internet. (Tr. 65, 71; GE 1, GE 5) 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant left Egypt and returned to Iraq for a visit with the 
intention of moving his wife and children to Egypt. At that time, he learned that his wife 
and sons had been executed by the Saddam regime after he fled Iraq. His surviving family 
members had kept that information from him for years. He remained in Iraq until July 
2011. He then traveled to and visited surrounding countries. (GE 1, GE 2) 
 
 In May 2013, Applicant established residency and opened a business in another 
Middle Eastern country. In January 2016, he closed this business because of the region’s 
instability and returned to the United States. He supported himself with earnings from his 
closed business and financial help from friends. (Tr. 68; GE 2, GE 5)  
 
 In 2017, Applicant obtained a position as a linguist and cultural advisor with 
another defense contractor and went to two Middle Eastern countries, which are U.S. 
allies. He was working and living on a military base in one of those countries until a week 
before his hearing date. He returned to that country after this hearing. (Tr. 69-72) 
  
 Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Iraq. Both are deceased. His father 
was executed by the Saddam regime. He had five brothers, one of whom was also 
executed by the Saddam regime in 1979. One brother is a citizen and resident of the 
United States. The other three brothers are citizens and residents of Iraq. His oldest 
brother is retired. Applicant spoke to him a month ago by telephone, but generally only 
 
 
 
 
4 
speaks to him once a year at the holidays. He has not spoken to his other two brothers in 
Iraq for years. One of them suffers from serious medical issues. (Tr. 45-50)  
 
 Applicant had three sisters. One of them is deceased. The other two are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. Both are widows and have adult children. He does not speak to 
them often. He spoke to one sister about six months ago. He spoke to the other sister 
three years ago. He has two nephews, who are citizens and residents of Iraq. He has not 
spoken to them for two or three years. (Tr. 52-53) His aunt, who was a citizen and resident 
of Iraq, died in 2017. (Tr. 51) 
  
 Applicant sent about $16,000 to four siblings living in Iraq over a seven-year period 
to help with living expenses. After Applicant’s mother died, his brother purchased 
Applicant’s inheritance share of their family residence. His siblings continue to own it. (GE 
2)   
 
 Applicant said he consistently places his life in jeopardy while working in Iraq at a 
specific location, and seemingly during his work in other countries. (Tr. 59) He 
intentionally does not tell his family that he works for the U.S. forces while he is in Iraq 
because it would be dangerous for them and could create a potential risk to their lives. 
Nor does he visit them while in Iraq. To his knowledge, none of them have been 
threatened by terrorists. (Tr. 32-33, 52, 76-77)  
  
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $25,457 
for a lien that that was filed against him in January 2012. 
 
 Applicant became aware of the tax lien during a September 2017 background 
interview with a government investigator. He denied that he owed the IRS the alleged 
amount of taxes for 2009. He said he owed $4,438 for unpaid interest and penalties for 
that year. On the day of his hearing, he sent a check to the IRS by certified mail. He said 
he was unable to pay the debt sooner because he had not been stateside and did not 
have enough money until recently. (Tr. 33-44) 
 
 The tax lien related to Applicant’s earnings for 2009. In 2008, he began investing 
in the stock market while working as a translator. He invested about $400,000 in the 
market, some of which he had earned as a translator. The rest of these funds were 
received as a settlement from the U.S. Government for his wrongful arrest at a border. 
His income for 2009 was $960,000, and included his salary and investment earnings. He 
said he paid $225,000 in income taxes for that year in 2010 while he was in his home 
state. It is unclear if he filed tax returns for tax years 2010 and subsequent years, although 
his income greatly decreased. His accountant told him he did not have a tax filing 
requirement for years 2015, 2016, and 2017, because he lacked sufficient income for 
those years. He stated he does not owe the IRS additional money for any years. (Tr. 33-
44; GE 5; Answer; AE A, AE B, AE G, AE H)  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 Applicant has a bank account in the United States. He currently has about $17,000 
in it. He does not have assets in any foreign country. When he is not working in the Middle 
East, he lives with close friends in the United States, some of whom he has known since 
he first arrived here in 2002. He does not own a home, but intends to purchase one in the 
future. The only money he earns now is his salary. He lost his stock investments while he 
was in Egypt in 2010 and was unable to manage his portfolio due to his accident. He has 
no delinquent debts. (Tr. 70-75) 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant submitted letters of recommendation. His current platoon leader states 
that he and his soldiers feel confident and secure while serving in Iraq as a result of 
Applicant’s diligence and superior performance. (AE E) Another platoon leader with whom 
Applicant worked in 2018 stated that Applicant is a loyal and hardworking member of his 
team. (AE E) A soldier, who currently works with Applicant in another country, stated that 
he has no reason to question Applicant’s loyalty and commitment to the mission they are 
performing. (AE D) Two friends, who have known Applicant for several years, consider 
him honest and trustworthy. (AE I, AE J)   
 
 Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a lawyer who has known him 
for 15 years. During that time, he represented Applicant in meetings with an investigative 
agency for the U.S. Government. Applicant provided valuable information to that agency 
about the post-invasion location of the headquarters of the former Iraqi regime. The 
lawyer attested to Applicant’s honesty, loyalty, and commitment to the United States. (AE 
F)  
 
 Iraq 
 
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
pronouncements concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE I, including the following: 
Iraq faces many challenges fueled by sectarian and ethnic divisions. Numerous terrorist 
groups are active throughout Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic 
State) controls some of the country’s territory. Threats of kidnapping and violence are 
high, and the Department of State warns U.S. citizens that all travel to Iraq should be 
avoided. Additionally, human-rights related problems including disappearances, torture, 
denial of fair public trial, and limits on freedom of speech and expression have been noted. 
(HE I.) The Department Counsel did not request administrative notice of any facts 
pertinent to the country of Egypt.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline includes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant has familial connections with three brothers, two sisters, and two 
nephews, who are residents and citizens of Iraq. These relationships create a heightened 
risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists and insurgents in Iraq 
may threaten Applicant and his family, as they may seek intelligence or engage in 
behaviors that are hostile to the United States’ interests. Applicant’s relationships with his 
relatives also create a potential conflict of interest between his obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and his desire to help family members living in Iraq. 
The evidence and Applicant’s admissions are sufficient to raise both disqualifying 
conditions, as to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, relating to his family 
members. SOR ¶ 1.c involved Applicant’s aunt, whose 2017 death eliminated any 
potential security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 Applicant’s connections to a friend, who is a citizen and resident of Egypt, raise a 
security concern under AG ¶ 7(b). This relationship could create a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and 
his desire to help his former caretaker living in Egypt. 
  
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts of this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant established compelling mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c). 
Applicant does not have frequent contact with his five siblings and two nephews, who are 
resident citizens of Iraq. He has not visited Iraq since he left in 2011. He is also acutely 
aware that interaction with family members, while working as a linguist for U.S. troops, 
could subject them to harm from terrorists. Thus, he avoids interacting with them 
frequently, and it is apparent he is not emotionally close to his siblings or nephews. His 
communication with his Egyptian friend is infrequent and via the internet. A key factor in 
the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S.” In 2002, he immigrated to the United States, and in 2008, he became a U.S. 
citizen. He has one brother, who is a U.S. citizen and resident. Applicant worked here for 
several years before obtaining a linguist position. He earned a substantial amount of 
money through his U.S. investments. His only financial assets are in the United States. 
He has established several long-term friendships since his arrival to the United States.  
 
Applicant’s four years of support to the DoD as a linguist and cultural advisor, 
including the dangers that his service entails, weigh heavily toward mitigating security 
concerns. Applicant is currently serving in a Middle Eastern ally country, providing critical 
assistance to U.S. forces. He is cognizant of the dangerous situations where he works, 
both in Iraq and in his current position. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity 
 
 
 
 
9 
to the United States during his years of support to the DoD while serving in Iraq and 
surrounding countries.  
  
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline lists several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant was unable or unwilling to timely pay his entire 2009 Federal income tax 
debt, resulting in an IRS tax lien being filed in 2012. This evidence establishes the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
 
 
10 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The tax lien was filed in 2012, about six years ago, and relates to Applicant’s 2009 
taxes. He paid the majority of the taxes due in 2010, but not all that was due. 
Consequently, he owed interest and penalties for the unpaid amount. He recently 
resolved the debt with the IRS and paid it. He obtained professional advice and resolved 
his tax issues. The evidence established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 
20(c). In April 2018, Applicant resolved the alleged $25,457 tax lien with a payment of 
$4,438 that represented unpaid interest and penalties for 2009 tax year. The evidence 
establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do not 
arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather family circumstances that 
are normal and outside his control.  
 
There is strong persuasive mitigating evidence weighing in favor of granting 
Applicant a security clearance. He is a mature and intelligent person, who arrived in the 
United States in 2002 as a refugee, having been tortured in Iraq by the Saddam regime. 
His father, brother, wife, and four sons were executed by that regime. One of his brothers 
 
 
 
 
11 
lives in the United States. He cooperated with a U.S. investigative agency by providing 
important information about the former Iraqi regime. He became a naturalized citizen in 
2008. He has infrequent contact with his siblings and nephews living in Iraq, and his friend 
in Egypt. In his employment from 2007 through 2009, and from 2017 to the present, 
Applicant has provided direct support to the U.S. armed forces as a linguist and cultural 
advisor. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential 
harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously. Applicant’s 
current supervisor and other soldiers assess him as loyal, trustworthy, and responsible. 
His friends are impressed by his honesty and loyalty. He resolved his tax lien, which 
involved less than $5,000 and resulted from unique circumstances more than eight years 
ago. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all pertinent facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence and financial considerations. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:          For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:             For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is granted. 
                                        
         
 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
