 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03406 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR initially on November 9, 2017, and followed-up by 
sending the DOD CAF more documents on November 20, 2017. She elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 24, 2018. 
The evidence included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-6 (Items 1 and 2 include 
pleadings and transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who 
received it on March 9, 2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to any 
of the Government’s evidence. She submitted one document, which was admitted as 
exhibit (AE) A. Items 3-6 are also admitted. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR with explanations. Her 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor since July 
2014. She married in March 2018 and she has no children. She served on active duty in 
the Air Force from 2005 to 2012. She separated with a general discharge under 
honorable conditions. She is a high school graduate and has taken some college 
courses.1 
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant abused her government travel card while in the Air 
Force; failed to file her federal and state (in her case the District of Columbia (DC)) 
income tax returns for years 2013-2016; owed delinquent federal income tax for tax 
year 2016 in the amount of $6,964; and owed on 17 delinquent repossession, charged-
off, collection accounts, or judgments in the total amount of approximately $37,309. The 
allegations are supported by credit reports from December 2015 and September 2017, 
Applicant’s statement to a defense investigator in October 2017, and Applicant’s SOR 
admissions.2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR answer, she explained that the reason for her financial 
difficulties stemmed from living beyond her means and providing financial assistance to 
her family. She also claimed that she was told by a financial advisor in 2015 not to pay 
her charged-off accounts because they would fall off her credit report. She followed that 
advice.3  
  
 The status of the SOR allegations is as follows: 
 
 Government Credit Card Abuse (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant admitted abusing her 
credit card. She used it because she needed to pay her and her mother’s rent after she 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
deployed. She was punished by her commander under Article 15 of the UCMJ. She 
claimed this incident had little bearing on her discharge from the Air Force a year later.4 
 
 Failing to File Federal and DC Income Tax Returns for 2013-2016 (SOR ¶ 
1.b). Applicant admitted failing to file all these income tax returns. She claimed she filed 
her 2016 federal tax return, but she failed to supply documentation supporting her filing 
of any federal or DC tax return for those years. Her federal and DC tax returns for years 
2013-2016 are unresolved.5 
 
 Delinquent Federal Income Tax Debt for 2016-$6,964 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant 
admitted owing this debt. She claimed that she set up a payment plan to resolve this 
debt. Her supporting document shows an attempt to set up a payment plan to pay her 
DC tax liability (not alleged in the SOR), but there is no supporting documentation 
showing she made any payments under that plan. There is no other documentation 
showing payment or a payment plan for her federal tax debt. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 Remaining Delinquent SOR Accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.t). Applicant admitted all 
these debts. She failed to provide documentation showing that she contacted the 
creditors to set up payment plans, or made payments toward any of these accounts, 
except for SOR ¶ 1.p, a student-loan account. She documented the establishment of a 
payment plan in August 2017, however, she failed to document any payments under the 
plan. She also claimed she reached a payment agreement with the creditor of SOR ¶ 
1.h, but she failed to provide supporting documentation of such an agreement. These 
debts are unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant submitted two character letters in support of her receiving a clearance. 
One was from a retired lieutenant general who worked with Applicant. The general 
found Applicant to be highly intelligent, enthusiastic, and professional. She 
recommended Applicant for a clearance. The second letter is from Applicant’s 
supervisor who has known her for eight years. This supervisor described Applicant as 
bright, dedicated, and self-directed.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Items 2, 5. 
 
6 Items 2, 5. 
 
7 Items 2, 5. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. She failed to file her 2013-
2016 federal and DC income tax returns or pay her 2016 federal tax debt. She also 
abused her government-issued credit card when she was in the Air Force. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
  None of these mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s debts are recent and 
remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial 
assistance to family members may be considered a condition beyond her control, 
however, she failed to take responsible actions to address her resulting debts. I find AG 
¶ 20(b) partially applies. She also failed to address her SOR debts through payments or 
establishing payment plans. There is no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply. She failed to document plans to resolve her federal and DC tax 
issues. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, and the circumstances that led to her financial difficulties. Applicant has not 
established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
