1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03225 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I find that Applicant 
failed to mitigate drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 4, 2016 to retain a security clearance required for her duties with a 
defense contractor. Applicant reported on this e-QIP that she has used cocaine since 
1995, and stopped using cocaine in 2013. She previously submitted an e-QIP on 
September 11, 2008, and a Standard Form (SF) 86 Security Clearance Application on 
December 11, 2001, but did not report any cocaine use on either form. Applicant has 
been eligible for access to classified information for more than 20 years.  
 
On September 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for drug involvement and 
substance misuse (Guideline H) and personal conduct for falsifying material facts on the 
e-QIP and the SCA (Guideline E). These actions were taken under Executive Order 
2 
 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2017. She admitted all 
allegations of drug involvement and substance misuse, as well as material falsifications 
on her 2008 e-QIP and her 2001 SCA. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on December 18, 2017. The case was assigned to another administrative judge. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on June 
26, 2018, scheduling a hearing for July 31, 2018. The case was transferred to me on 
July 10, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered five 
exhibits, which I marked as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5. I only admitted GX 
1-4 into the record.1 Applicant testified, and offered sixteen exhibits which I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through P. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 8, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. Applicant is 57 years old. She graduated from high school in 1978. She has 
taken some college courses but has not received a degree. She has lived with her 
husband for over 20 years, but they have only been married since October 2013. She 
has no children. Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor as an 
application systems specialist since December 1991. Her parents are deceased and 
she has two sisters, one with special needs that she assists. (Tr. 12-14; Gov. Ex. 1, e-
QIP, dated August 4, 2016; GX 2, e-QIP, dated September 11, 2008; GX 3, SCA, 
December 11, 2001; AX A, Biography; AX B, Resume; AX C, State Driver’s License; AX 
D and AX K, Family Photograph; AX L, Updated Resume)  
 
The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that she purchased and used crack 
cocaine from approximately 1995 through at least 2013. (SOR 1.a) She admitted that 
she purchased and used the drugs after receiving a security clearance in October 2008. 
(SOR 1.b) The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that she falsified her SF 86 in 
December 2001 (SOR 2.a) and her e-QIP in September 11, 2008 (SOR 2.b) by 
deliberately failing to disclose her purchase and use of crack cocaine. (GX 4, Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS), Incident History, dated August 3, 2016) 
 
Applicant testified that she was not certain when she started using cocaine but 
she admitted to purchasing and using crack cocaine starting in 1995 because she 
wanted to smoke cocaine. She understood there was a federal prohibition against using 
drugs particularly while having eligibility for access to classified information. Her 
employer has a policy against using illegal drugs, but she was not tested for drug use. 
                                                          
1 The Government initially offered five exhibits but withdrew government Exhibit 5, a copy of a Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI). (Tr. 5-6) 
3 
 
She started using drugs because her future husband and the people that were her 
friends and acquaintances were using drugs. She initially received the cocaine from her 
friends. She does not remember when she actually started purchasing cocaine for her 
own use. She smoked cocaine about four or five times a week. (Tr. 26-30) 
 
Applicant and her future husband stopped purchasing and using cocaine in 
approximately 2010. They started to disassociate themselves from the people that they 
used drugs with them. They used cocaine a few more times after that, with about six to 
nine months between uses. Between 2010 and 2013, Applicant and her future husband 
had a couple of relapses, and they occasionally used drugs. Applicant definitely stopped 
using cocaine when she and her husband married in 2013. She did not suddenly stop 
using drugs but it was a gradual process. She no longer associates with the people she 
formally used cocaine. (Tr. 30-31) 
 
Applicant stated she can no longer tolerate or enjoy the cocaine. She does not 
consider herself addicted to cocaine despite using cocaine for almost 20 years. Even 
though Applicant never used marijuana, she acknowledged that her husband still uses 
marijuana, and that she has seen him use marijuana. Applicant also executed a 
document stating that if she used drugs in the future her security clearance could be 
automatically revoked. (Tr.33-35; AX E, statement) 
 
Applicant recently volunteered to take drug tests and the tests were negative for 
drugs. (AX F, dated October 24, 2017; AX O, dated July 9, 2018) Applicant has met with 
a counselor for treatment for anxiety once a week for at least 17 weeks since January 
2018. The counselor does not prescribe drugs for her anxiety, but she is a good support 
system for Applicant. Applicant admits she is in therapy for anxiety but not for drug use. 
(Tr. 16-23).  
 
Applicant’s drug use has not affected her finances. Her house is completely paid 
and she has sizeable funds in savings accounts, checking accounts, money market 
accounts, and retirement accounts. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
Applicant admits that she deliberately did not report her use of cocaine on her 
2001 and 2008 security clearance applications. She was in denial concerning her illegal 
drug use and did not want to deal with the fact of her drug use. She knew that drug use 
reflects poorly on her, so she wanted to avoid the subject of her drug use. She was not 
comfortable talking to others about her drug use. She did not think anyone would find 
out about her drug use. She reported her drug use during the security clearance 
process in 2016 because she wanted to move forward. She is a different person and 
wants to get on with her life. She did not believe she had a drug problem that she 
needed to report. She talked to some of her co-workers about reporting her drug use, 
and was told that she did not have to report her substance abuse, if there were no 
records of her using illegal drugs. She admits that the advice was wrong and she should 
not have followed it. (Tr. 36-39) 
 
4 
 
Applicant acknowledges that it was wrong for her to abuse drugs and to fail to be 
honest on her security clearance applications. She acknowledges her drug involvement 
and substance abuse, and she claims to have taken actions to overcome her drug use 
problem. She no longer enjoys drugs. She stays to herself and no longer sees people 
that previously used drugs with her. Applicant pointed out that she agrees to be drug 
tested and that she signed a letter of intent not to use drugs in the future. She 
cooperated with investigative authorities concerning her drug use and information on 
her security clearance. (Tr.24-25) 
 
Applicant presented seven letters of recommendation from fellow workers and 
her supervisors that attest to her dedication, work ethic, knowledge and excellent work 
performance. (AX G and P) She also presented information to establish the good work 
she performed for her employer (AX H and M), and awards she received. (AX I)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Administrative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, because it may impair judgment and 
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior 
altering substances, including drug material and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Cocaine is included in the 
Schedule 1 list. (AG ¶ 24)  
 
Applicant purchased and used crack cocaine four or five times a week for over 
18 years with her now husband starting in 1995. She stopped using crack cocaine when 
she and her husband married in 2013. She was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information in the late 1990s, and has maintained that eligibility since then. 
Applicant’s admissions and the available evidence is sufficient to raise the following 
Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any substance misuse; 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
 I considered the following Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 
26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
6 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as; (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination whether past conduct 
affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. Based on an evaluation of the evidence 
presented at the hearing and in the case file, I conclude that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. 
 
Applicant purchased and used crack cocaine for over 18 years starting in 1995, 
and only stopped using cocaine in 2013. Applicant used cocaine for an extended period 
of time and only stopped using the illegal drug five years ago. Applicant did not present 
evidence of enrollment in or attendance at a drug treatment program. The evidence she 
presented is treatment by a therapist for anxiety and not directly for substance abuse. 
Applicant lives with her husband who used cocaine for many years with her. He is still 
using the illegal drug abuse, marijuana. Even though she claims she no longer 
associates with her former drug abusing acquaintances, living with her drug abusing 
husband negates a finding that her use happens under unusual circumstances and is 
unlikely to happen again. Her relationship to and living with her husband undercuts her 
stated intent not to use cocaine or other illegal drugs in the future. Her last use of 
cocaine was only five years ago under circumstances that can likely recur. Under these 
circumstances, there has not been an appropriate period of abstinence. Applicant has 
not established circumstances that could indicate a change in lifestyle and 
circumstance. Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns for drug involvement.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
7 
 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
It is deliberate if done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not provide full, complete, and accurate 
information concerning his drug use in responses to drug use questions on two security 
clearance applications, an SF 86 on December 11, 2001, and an e-QIP on September 
11, 2008. The reason she did not list her cocaine use on the security clearance 
applications was because she did not want to deal with her substance abuse. There is 
sufficient evidence to establish that Applicant deliberately did not provide full, complete, 
and accurate information concerning her drug use on the applications. Applicant’s 
failure to list her cocaine use on the SF 86 and the e-QIP raises a security concern 
under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
I considered the following Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advise of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressor, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other appropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Since the security clearance process 
relies on an applicant providing correct information, Applicant’s failure to list her cocaine 
purchase and use on her security clearance applications is not a minor offense. The 
personal conduct security concern is that Applicant “deliberately” did not provide 
correct, true, and accurate information. Applicant admits that she intentionally did not 
provide full, complete, and accurate information on the SF 86 and the e-QIP because 
8 
 
she was in denial concerning her illegal drug use and she did not want to deal with the 
facts of her drug use. She knew that drug use reflects poorly on her, so she wanted to 
avoid the subject. She was not comfortable talking to others about her drug use and she 
did not think anyone would find out about her drug use. She reported her drug use 
during the security clearance process in 2016. 
 
 Applicant’s failures to list her cocaine use were deliberate and not the result of a 
misunderstanding of why the government was concerned about use of illegal 
substances. Based on the available evidence and Applicant’s admission, I find that 
Applicant deliberately failed to provide correct and accurate information on drug use on 
her SF 86 in 2001 and her e-QIP in 2008. I conclude that Applicant did not mitigate the 
personal conduct security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s family 
circumstances, her letters of recommendation, and her intention not to use illegal drugs 
in the future. The allegations under Guidelines E and H, as established by the 
government’s evidence, reflect a lack of judgment by Applicant. The evidence shows an 
extensive the use of cocaine while having eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose her cocaine use and while holding a 
security clearance is that she just did not want to face the fact of her illegal drug use. 
Applicant’s actions of using cocaine shows a lack of good judgment. She also showed a 
lack of good judgment when she did not list her use of cocaine on the SF 86 and the e-
QIP, and could not provide an adequate explanation or reason for her earlier failure. 
Applicant’s statement of intent not to use marijuana in the future has little impact 
because of her extended voluntary use and her continued residing with a known drug 
9 
 
abuser. Applicant has not established that she did not deliberately provide false 
information concerning her drug use on an SF 86 and an e-QIP. These facts leave me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment and her suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated 
drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
