 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04123 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Guideline J, (Criminal Conduct), security concerns. He failed 
to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations). 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline J, criminal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 16, 2018. He admitted the nine SOR 
allegations alleged under Guideline F, and he admitted the single allegation alleged 
under Guideline J. He did not provide any additional documentation. Applicant 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record in 
 
2 
 
 
lieu of a hearing. (Item 2) On February 26, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant on April 17, 2018. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did 
submit additional explanations for SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 2.a, but he did not provide any 
supporting documentation. I labeled his explanation as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. 
Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 5, and Department Counsel did not object to 
AE A. I admitted all of the exhibits into the record. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 7, 2018.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  Applicant is 51 years old and 
employed by a DOD contractor as a systems engineer since August 2016. He was 
unemployed from June 2016 to August 2016. He earned his bachelor’s degree in 1991, 
and his master’s degree in 1993. He was married in 1996, and his divorce was finalized 
in 2017. Applicant listed a son, age 9, and two daughters, ages 20 and 16, on the 2016 
SCA. He is requesting national security eligibility.  (Item 2) 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges that Applicant owes over $50,000 on his 
delinquent debts, to include a repossessed vehicle, delinquent student loans, and a 
significant Federal tax lien. The SCA showed only one period of unemployment, from 
June 2016 to August 2016, otherwise his work history showed consistent employment. 
He did not provide an explanation as to why he started having financial problems. He 
did note that he had obtained credit cards while he was briefly unemployed, and he 
made reference to his divorce that was finalized in 2017. Both the 2016 and 2017 credit 
reports support the debts alleged in the SOR. (Items 2, 3, 4, 5.) 
  
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant owes $16,189 for a car that was returned to the 
bank. This account was charged-off as a bad debt. He listed in his answer to the SOR 
that this account was over seven years old and will be expunged from his credit report 
soon. There was no documentation provided by Applicant to show his efforts, if any, in 
resolving this debt, other than to let it fall off of his credit report due to time.   
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the cellular account alleged in the SOR for 
$791. (SOR ¶ 1.b) He said this account included phone lines for family and friends. He 
was unable to reconcile all of the payments for the various accounts. There is no 
evidence to show that Applicant made any effort to resolve this delinquent account. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e, are delinquent credit card accounts totaling $1,866. 
Applicant admitted that he obtained the credit cards while he was unemployed. There is 
no indication that he arranged a payment plan with the creditors, or that he resolved any 
of these delinquent credit card accounts. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the jeweler account (SOR ¶ 1.f) that was 
charged-off as a bad debt for an unknown amount. The credit bureau report showed the 
balance of the account as $3,931 in October 2016. Applicant listed that this debt 
represented a 20-year anniversary gift that was given to his now ex-wife. The divorce 
proceedings began less than a year after he presented her with the gift. He has not paid 
this debt.  (Item 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a U.S. Department of Education loan that is currently past 
due. Applicant claimed in his response to the FORM that his student loans were still in 
forbearance. (AE A) He did not provide any supporting documentation with his 
response. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has a Federal tax lien that was entered against 
him in the amount of $32,722. (SOR ¶ 1.h) He listed in his response to the FORM that 
after conferring with his ex-spouse, he believed the tax lien was paid in full. He also 
noted in his SOR response that he had been placed on a payment plan with the Internal 
Revenue Service. He claimed the Federal tax lien had been attached to his residence, 
which was later sold. He did not provide any supporting documentation, to include his 
history of tax payments or a release of the Federal tax lien. Both credit bureau reports 
showed the Federal tax lien had not been released. (AE A; Items 4, 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges that Applicant owes $1,024 for a utility account that was 
referred for collection. He admitted this cellular family plan account that was in effect 
during his previous marriage. There is no evidence to show that Applicant made any 
effort to resolve this delinquent account. 
 
Guideline J of the SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in 2015 for Driving 
Under the Influence. (SOR ¶ 2.a) He admitted this was a first offense, and he deeply 
regretted his actions. Applicant claimed his attorney arranged an agreement with the 
prosecuting attorney that Applicant fulfill the state’s division of motor vehicles 20-month 
period of using an interlock device on his vehicle. In addition, Applicant must complete a 
DUI education course and pay the reinstatement fee. If he successfully completed these 
requirements, then the charge against him would be dismissed. Applicant listed in his 
FORM response that he had successfully completed the interlock period, and it had 
been removed from his vehicle. His hearing for the charge dismissal had not yet been 
set. There was no supporting documentation provided by Applicant. (AE A) 
 
                                                    Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) … failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
   
 In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty after a period of unemployment in 2016 
and the finalization of his divorce in 2017. Applicant admitted that most of the debts 
alleged in the SOR have not been resolved. He also did not exhibit any inclination to 
resolve his delinquent debts, as demonstrated by his allowing the repossessed car loan 
to fall off his credit bureau report. He claimed that his student loans were currently in 
forbearance, and that the Federal tax lien filed against him was paid, but he failed to 
provide any supporting documentation. The delinquent debts alleged are unresolved. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,1 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues have continued to the present time. He has been 
employed full-time since August 2016. He has not provided proof that he has paid or 
resolved even the smallest debt in the SOR. There is no evidence that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant is enrolled in a credit service or undertaken 
financial counseling. There is insufficient evidence to show that he has made a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. 
Insufficient evidence was provided to apply AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d). 
 
 Applicant claimed that the Federal tax lien was satisfied, however, the two credit 
bureau reports show that the tax lien has not been released. He failed to provide 
documentation to support his claim. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
 The financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information.   
 
                                                          
1 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s ongoing, unpaid 
debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for purposes of the Guideline 
F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:   
  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested for a recent charge of Driving Under the Influence 
offense. At the time the SOR was issued, he was still in the 20-month period of 
compliance under the terms of the prosecutor’s agreement. AG¶ 31(b) is established.   
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 and considered 
the following relevant:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and   
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.  
 
  Applicant’s 2015 DUI offense is his first criminal offense. He is very remorseful 
about the incident and has made assurances that this will never happen again. He has 
successfully completed the 20-month period of the interlock device on his vehicle. He is 
currently waiting for his upcoming hearing to have the charge dismissed. I find that the 
behavior which resulted in his arrest is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Both AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F, and Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) was addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is 51 years old and employed by a DOD contractor as a systems 
engineer since August 2016. He obtained a master’s degree in 1993. Applicant’s debts 
have accumulated over the years, and his overall debt is substantial. Applicant chose 
not to submit any mitigating evidence with his FORM response despite Department 
Counsel noting in the Government’s brief that Applicant failed to provide any supporting 
documentation to demonstrate that he is resolving his delinquent debts. There is no 
showing that Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debts, or any 
information in the file to support that he has paid even the smallest debt alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns alleged under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-i:  Against Applicant  
 
 
9 
 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                      
 
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
