 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-02409 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct trustworthiness concerns, but failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 26, 2017, and November 16, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Statements of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, and 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SORs on September 23, 2017, and November 20, 2017, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on January 8, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on January 25, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 21, 2018. On 
 
2 
March 14, 2018, Applicant requested a continuance. His request was granted.1 On May 
17, 2018, DOHA issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for July 24, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through K, which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on August 1, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.c,2 1.e, and 2.a through 2.g. He 
denied the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.h through 1.l. The Government 
withdrew the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1997 and a master’s 
degree in 2012. He married in 2007 and was separated from August 2012 to April 2016, 
when his divorce was final. He has four children from the marriage, ages 16, 15, 10 and 
9 years old. He has two other children ages 21 and 24 from a previous relationship. He 
testified he was unemployed from August 2014 to November 2014, when he began 
work with his current employer.3  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR he denied all of the delinquent debts alleged 
except a student loan owed to a university and repossessed vehicle. He said his late 
father had the same name as his and many times the credit references for his father 
were linked to Applicant’s credit report. In response to SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f through 1.l, 
Applicant stated: I disputed the debts with all 3 major credit bureaus.”4 He did not 
provide any documents to corroborate his disputes or resolution of the disputes.5  
 
 During Applicant’s April 2017 background investigation with a government 
investigator, he was confronted by the investigator with each of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.l. He told the investigator that he agreed with each debt; he could 
not recall the specific details of each debt including the date it was initially incurred, the 
date it became delinquent or any collection efforts; he did not list the debt on his 
security clearance questionnaire due to forgetting about the debt; his future intention 
was to contact each creditor and to repay the debt by a date not yet determined; and his 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the Government’s exhibit list; HE II is the Government’s discovery letter; HE III 
is email correspondence. 
 
2 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR 1.c in his original answer. The amended SOR changed ¶ 1.c by 
noting the account was charged off in the amount of $20,018. Applicant admitted the amended allegation.  
 
3 Tr. 20-23. 
 
4 Answer to SOR September 23, 2017. 
 
5 Answer to SOR.  
 
3 
financial problems were due to his past divorce, loss of his wife’s income, and his 
requirement to pay child support.6  
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a (past-due mortgage in approximate 
amount of $26,516). He explained he began missing mortgage payments in February 
2013, due to his child support obligations. He made some payments, but not the full 
amount. He could not afford to make the full mortgage payment and defaulted on his 
mortgage. He provided a document to show that in April 2018, he was approved to 
enter into a trial period for a mortgage modification. He made the required three monthly 
payments of $980. He did not know if the delinquent amount would be rolled into a new 
balance. He believed his new monthly payment will be $980. He was waiting for the final 
modification documents from the mortgagor.7  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($25,690) is a collection account for delinquent child 
support. Applicant attributes this debt to unemployment. He testified that in February 
2013, he was ordered to pay $4,500 as a one-time payment and then pay $1,000 a 
month for his four children. He said he made these payments until April 2016. He said 
he was providing his wife “other payments” that were not reflected. When he went to 
court, he provided receipts of his payments, but he could not prove all of the amounts 
he claimed he paid. He said this is the arrearages. He provided a document to show 
that the amount of child support in arrears as of July 2018 is $16,746. He also provided 
a document to show that from August 16, 2016, to July 2018, weekly payments of $685 
were made for child support and arrearages. The document also shows that two weekly 
payments on August 2 and July 26, 2016, were made for $219. Applicant stated that 
withdrawals are made directly from his pay for his current child support and arrearages, 
and he should be caught up in 117 weeks.8 
 
 Applicant attributes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c to his divorce and child support 
obligations. He purchased a used car in February 2013 for $25,000. His last full 
payment was July 2017. He maintained possession of the vehicle until early 2018 when 
he returned it to the creditor. The balance owed is $20,018. He contacted the creditor in 
July 2018 and made an agreement to pay $50 a month. He testified that beginning in 
August 2018, he would pay $375 a month.9 
 
 Applicant testified that in January 2018 he spoke with a credit counselor for 
financial advice because he believed it would be helpful to mitigate the security 
concerns raised. He was advised to consolidate all of his bills into a monthly payment. 
He did not take the advice, instead he wanted to work out individual agreements with 
                                                          
6 GE 2. I have not considered any derogatory evidence that was not alleged for disqualifying purposes. I 
may consider it when making a credibility determination, in the application of mitigation, and in a whole-
person analysis.  
 
7 Tr. 23-33; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. 33-44; AE B. 
 
9 Tr. 44-52; GE 5; AE C. 
 
 
4 
his mortgage company and the car creditor, as explained above. He believed he could 
pay the smaller bills directly and consolidate the others. He provided no evidence that 
he has done this. He does not have a contract with the credit counselor and has not had 
recent contact with her since January 2018. Applicant stated that at some point in the 
future, the credit counselor will contact his creditors to negotiate settlements and 
arrange payment plans. He was unaware if his credit counselor had contacted his 
creditors, but assumed she did. He stated he has a step-by-step process to resolve his 
debts and resolution of the remaining debts “in the future, they’re part of my financial 
plan, and those will be the next steps that I will be tracking.”10  
 
 Applicant works part time as a driver. He anticipated working at another part-time 
job with increased pay. At the time of hearing, he had not started the job. He provides 
some support to his older children, as needed. Applicant owes approximately $80,000 in 
student loans. In July 2018, he requested the loans be placed in forbearance. It is 
unknown if the charged off student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is included in the 
forbearance request. His request was approved, and the loans will not be due until April 
2019. Interest on the loans continues to accrue. At this time, he does not know the 
amount his monthly payments will be. He hopes to get another part time job that will pay 
more.11 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and credit reports from December 2016, June 
2017, and October 2017 corroborate the debts alleged in the SOR.12 
 
 Applicant was arrested in October 1995 and charged with first degree battery. He 
pled no contest and was placed on 12-months’ probation. Applicant testified that he 
grabbed his college girlfriend at the time, and she fell and sustained scratches. He 
admitted he accepted a no contest plea. He was on probation and attended 26 weeks of 
domestic violence classes. He completed the terms of the probation. He no longer has 
contact with this woman.13 
 
 A temporary injunction was entered on behalf of Applicant’s wife against him in 
July 16, 2012 for protection (domestic violence with children). On July 27, 2012, a 
petition for an injunction (domestic violence with children) was filed by Applicant’s wife 
against him. Applicant was arrested on July 31, 2012, and charged with first degree 
battery-domestic violence, a misdemeanor against his wife. Applicant admitted the 
allegation. In his statement to the police, he claimed he sprayed his wife in the face with 
mace in self-defense. His wife’s statement contradicts his claims. She said he attacked 
her without provocation. The charge was eventually nolle prossed.14  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 53-65; AE D. 
 
11 Tr. 65-73; AE D. 
 
12 GE 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
13 Tr. 73-78. 
 
14 Tr. 79-92; GE 6, 7. 
 
5 
 In August 2012, a one-year permanent injunction for protection (domestic 
violence with children) was entered against Applicant on behalf of his wife. On 
November 12, 2013, a petition for injunction (domestic violence with children) was filed 
against Applicant by his wife.15  
 
 Applicant testified that the above accusations (SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, 2.e, and 2.f) 
were related to his issues with his wife and their divorce. He claimed she wanted a 
divorce and had moved out of their house. He believed she had a plan to use the 
domestic violence accusations so she would be awarded the house. He said the house 
was in his name only. He believed that she wanted to get an injunction against him so 
she would be given custody of their children. There is no corroborating evidence.16  
   
 In December 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with third degree 
aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, a felony. Applicant was living with a girlfriend. 
He denied he assaulted her. He stated that she had a knife, and he called the police. 
The charge was not pursued by the prosecution. Appellant provided a letter from the 
girlfriend stating she was the aggressor; was in possession of the knife; and she lied to 
the police when she told them what had happened.17 
 
 Applicant testified that he recently sought counseling and a psychological 
evaluation. One was conducted by a licensed psychologist who noted it was being 
conducted in order for Applicant to apply for a security clearance.18 The psychologist 
stated:  
 
Per his own self-report, there were two instances in the past which resulted 
in arrests; however, he was candid in sharing his perspective of the 
struggles and adamant that he was not the aggressor in both situations, as 
evidence of the charges being dropped. Current test results revealed no 
concerns in regards to his temperament or anger management; it is highly 
likely that personality differences and/or poor decision-making in regards to 
past actions and/or relationships may have accounted for extreme 
interactions.19  
 
 The psychologist’s diagnosis was “no diagnosis.” Applicant failed to disclose to 
the psychologist his 1995 arrest for battery against his girlfriend and that he was placed 
on probation for a year and was required to complete 26 weeks of domestic violence 
classes. Applicant reported to the psychologist the incident when he sprayed his ex-wife 
with mace indicating he was not the aggressor and a second incident when a girlfriend 
claimed he threatened her with a knife and then recanted her story. Applicant’s failure to 
                                                          
15 Tr. 79-92. 
 
 16Tr. 79-92; GE 6, 7. 
 
17 Tr. 93-96; AE H. 
 
18 Tr. 96-102; Applicant’s application is for a position of trust and not a security clearance determination. 
 
19 AE J. 
 
6 
be completely forthcoming about his past conduct raises questions about the reliability 
of the diagnosis.20  
 
 Applicant testified that he wanted to determine if he had any anger issues and 
was told by his psychologist that he was fine. His psychologist did not recommend any 
counseling. Applicant said that he has not had any incidents with his ex-wife since 2013 
and their relationship is now cordial.21 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
20 AE J. 
 
21 Tr. 96-102; AE G. 
 
7 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following is potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2013, 
including delinquent child support that he is unable or unwilling to resolve. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
8 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt, which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a short period of unemployment in 
2014 and his divorce. He separated from his wife in 2012, and the divorce was final in 
April 2016. He paid child support, but accumulated arrearages. He acknowledged his 
delinquent debts when he was interviewed by a government investigator in 2017 and 
indicated he would pay them in the future. He denied them in his answer to the SOR. 
He recently obtained a loan modification for his mortgage. He has a recent modest 
payment agreement for a repossessed car debt. He did not provide sufficient evidence 
that he is addressing his other delinquent debts. His debts are recent. He has not 
established a reliable financial track record. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
future financial problem are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a period of unemployment in 2014, 
divorce, and child support. He had been separated since 2012. His unemployment and 
divorce were beyond his control. His obligation to pay child support is his responsibility 
as a father and not beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has obtained a loan 
modification for his mortgage and completed the three-month trial period. He recently 
began paying $50 a month for the amount owed on his repossessed vehicle. During his 
background interview, he said he would address his delinquent debts in the future. He 
testified that he contacted a credit counselor, but has not addressed his other 
delinquent debts. Although he has addressed two of his SOR debts, he has only made 
three payments to date. The evidence is insufficient to show he has acted responsibly 
regarding his other debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is evidence that Applicant sought advice from a credit counselor, but there 
is insufficient evidence to conclude there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control. Applicant told the government investigator in 2017 that he 
would address his delinquent debts in the future. He testified at his hearing that he 
 
9 
believed he could pay the smaller bills directly and consolidate the others. He provided 
no evidence that he has done this. He has not had recent contact with the credit 
counselor. Applicant stated that at some point in the future, he will contact his creditors 
to negotiate settlements and arrange payment plans. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
  
 Applicant obtained a loan modification for his mortgage. He recently completed a 
three-month trial period of payments. He is waiting for the mortgage company to provide 
him with the completed loan modification at which time he will begin making monthly 
payments. His monthly child support is being paid automatically and additional amounts 
are deducted to reduce his arrearages. He still owes over $16,000 in arrearages. He 
recently began paying $50 monthly for his repossessed vehicle. He stated the amount 
will increase in August 2018. Applicant has made some effort to address his delinquent 
bills. However, he still has numerous delinquent debts and does not have a viable plan 
for resolving them other than to say he will do so in the future. AG ¶ 20(d) has some 
application, but Applicant lacks a financial track record of sustained payments. 
 
 During his interview with a government investigator, Applicant agreed he owed 
the debts alleged, forgot to disclose them on his SCA, and he said he would repay them 
in the future. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied he owed most of the 
delinquent debts alleged, saying he disputed them with the three major credit bureaus. 
He did not provide evidence that the debts do not belong to him; documents to 
corroborate his disputes; or resolutions of the disputes. At his hearing, he said he would 
resolve his delinquent debts in the future. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(d) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a while, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and  
 
 
10 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 In 1995, Applicant was charged with first degree battery on his girlfriend. He pled 
no contest, was given probation for 12 months and required to attend a 26-week 
domestic violence program, which he completed. In 2012, Applicant and his wife were 
separated, and she filed several temporary injunctions for protection, which were 
denied. He admitted that he sprayed her with mace. Both claim the other was the 
aggressor. A permanent injunction for protection was granted after this incident. In 
December 2014, Applicant’s girlfriend claimed he threatened her with a knife. She later 
recanted her allegation. None of the altercations with his wife or his later girlfriend 
resulted in convictions. There is sufficient evidence to show a pattern of conduct that 
raises concerns under the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or take other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate the 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant was involved in a domestic violence incident in 1995. He pled no 
contest, was on probation for a year, and completed a domestic violence program. From 
2012 to 2016, Applicant and his wife had a tumultuous separation and divorce. It 
appears both were involved in conduct to gain a more advantageous position. Applicant 
sprayed his wife with mace. The offense was not prosecuted. In 2014, he was involved 
in an incident with a girlfriend. He denied he was the aggressor, and she later recanted 
her story. It appears the issues with his wife are resolved, and he is no longer 
associated with the other women. Applicant’s failure to disclose his 1995 domestic 
violence offense to the psychologist during his psychological evaluation, raises 
 
11 
questions about the reliability of the diagnosis. Applicant’s personal conduct was not 
minor or infrequent, but it appears now that his personal life is settled, it is unlikely to 
recur. I find AG ¶ 17(a) has some application.  
 
Applicant failure to be completely honest with his psychologist to determine if he 
had a problem is a concern. I find AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) have some application. 
Applicant’s ex-girlfriend recanted her allegation, so there is some evidence regarding 
her reliability. However, I am unable to determine her actual motivation for recanting. 
AG ¶ 17(f) has some application. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He accumulated delinquent debts due to 
unemployment and divorce. He recently completed a three-month trial period on a loan 
modification for his delinquent mortgage. He recently made three payments of $50 on 
the debt for his repossessed vehicle. He is making child support payments, but still 
owes $16,000 in arrearages. A significant concern is that Applicant acknowledged the 
delinquent debts during his background interview, said he forgot to disclose them, and 
said he would address them in the future. He then denied the debts in his answer to the 
SOR, alluded to them being a mistake because his deceased father had the same 
name, and that he disputed them with the credit bureaus. At his hearing, he 
acknowledged the delinquent debts and said he sought credit counseling, and again 
said he would address them in the future. I question Applicant’s credibility. Although, I 
believe there is sufficient evidence to mitigate the personal conduct concerns raised by 
 
12 
his conduct with his ex-wife, his ex-girlfriend from 1995, and the allegation from his ex-
girlfriend from 2014, I do have concerns about his honesty with his psychologist and 
statements he made regarding his finances. Although Applicant addressed some of his 
delinquent debts, at the time of his hearing, he had only made payments for three 
months. He failed to address any of his other debts, promising to do so in the future. A 
promise he also made during his background interview. Applicant has not established a 
sufficient reliable financial track record. He has mitigated the personal conduct 
concerns, but there is insufficient evidence to overcome the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.b:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
