 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01942 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, because his alcohol-related offenses are not recent and he modified his 
alcohol consumption. Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 7, 2016. 
On June 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, 
and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the national security 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 7, 2017, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on March 12, 2018. On April 20, 2018, a notice of hearing 
was issued scheduling the case for May 24, 2018. The hearing convened as scheduled. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 
12, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. I left the record open to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE B 
and AE C, which were admitted without objection. The record closed on June 1, 2018. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, and ¶¶ 2.a-2.c, with some explanations. He 
partially admitted and partially denied SOR ¶ 2.d, with an explanation. His admissions 
and explanations are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has never married but he has a longtime 
cohabitant. He has no children. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s 
degree. He has been a federal contractor for about 30 years. He has worked for his 
current employer for about four years. He has held a security clearance since about 
2010, and also held one in the early 1990s. (Tr. 31-33; GE 1; GE 2) 
 
 All of the Guideline G allegations concern arrests for driving under the influence 
of alcohol (DUI) or driving while impaired (DWI). (SOR ¶ 1) Those allegations are cross-
alleged under Guideline J (SOR ¶ 2.a) along with other, more recent traffic offenses. 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d) 
 
 Applicant’s first offense occurred in June 1994. He went out drinking with friends 
after a softball game. He was pulled over on his way home. He was arrested and 
charged with DUI. (SOR ¶ 1.d) He received six months of unsupervised probation 
before judgment (PBJ). Applicant testified that, while he was on probation, his driver’s 
license was suspended, and he was ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) once 
a week. He was also ordered to attend an alcohol-education course. (Tr. 36-38, 64; GE 
2 at 37) 
 
 One morning in July 2010, Applicant’s cohabitant got in his car to drive to work. 
The car broke down about half a mile from their house. She “came storming back to the 
house, threw the keys at me, and told me to deal with it.” (Tr. 39) Applicant called a tow 
truck and went out to the car to meet it. (Tr. 38-41) Applicant smelled of alcohol 
because he had been drinking at a neighborhood party the night before until early that 
morning. When the police arrived, they observed his condition and saw him with the car 
keys. (Tr. 39; GE 1) Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and DWI. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
Although the DWI charge was nolle prosequi, he pleaded guilty to the DUI charge and 
was sentenced to PBJ and fined $140, plus court costs. (GE 6; GE 7)  
 
 
3 
 
Applicant reported the 2010 arrest on his 2016 SCA, but also stated that the DUI 
charge was “immediately dismissed and the record expunged” because he had not 
been driving. (GE 1 at 28-29) At hearing, Applicant repeated his claim that the charge 
had been dismissed, and denied receiving probation. (Tr. 39, 64) In fact, as noted 
above, he pleaded guilty to the DUI charge and received a term of PBJ (the length of 
which is unclear).  
 
In December 2012, Applicant was drinking at a bar watching a football game with 
friends. His cohabitant was to meet him there after work. She was running late, so she 
asked him to go out and run an errand for her. While running the errand, Applicant rear-
ended another driver at an intersection when he failed to stop soon enough at a traffic 
light. Applicant acknowledged at hearing that he had been at fault and had been 
drinking “more than I should have been to get behind the wheel.” (Tr. 43-44, 49-51, 83) 
 
Applicant was arrested for DUI per se, DUI, and DWI. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b)1 (GE 3; 
GE 4; GE 5) Though not alleged, Applicant was also charged with failure to control 
speed to avoid collision, negligent driving, and driving on an expired license, as shown 
by documentation he submitted after the hearing. (AE B) Applicant pleaded guilty to DUI 
per se in March 2013. He received a 60-day suspended jail sentence and was 
sentenced to two years of unsupervised probation and fined $565. The other counts 
were nolle prosequi. (Tr. 43-44, 64-65; AE B; GE 1; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5). The other driver 
later sued for damages, and the case settled. (Tr. 44; GE 1 at 39) 
 
While on probation, Applicant participated in an alcohol counseling and education 
program. He attended weekly group counseling sessions from March to August 2013. 
He was also given (and passed) a breathalyzer at each meeting. He completed the 
program successfully, with early termination. Applicant was not diagnosed with an 
alcohol-use disorder. (Tr. 65-67, 83-85; AE B) 
 
Applicant testified that after the 2012 accident, he “self-imposed a rule . . . that if 
I’m responsible for getting anywhere I won’t drink” and to “be smarter about my own 
behavior.” (Tr. 48, 49) He testified that he used the incident as a “springboard to clean 
up [his] act.” He has not had any alcohol offenses since then. (Tr. 67) He does not drink 
anything at happy hour after work or when he knows he might be driving. He confines 
his drinking to when he is “stationary” or when he is out camping. When he drinks, he 
has two or three beers, and does not drink to intoxication. (Tr. 74-75, 85-86) 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant was driving to work on an interstate highway. He believed 
he was being pursued by a driver he considered aggressive.2 When he got to his exit, 
he decided to pull off the road because he didn’t want her following him to his 
workplace. The exit ramp lanes were constricted due to construction and traffic cones, 
                                                          
1 The accident was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and the resulting charges were alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 49-51, 
93-94) SOR ¶ 1.b is therefore duplicative. 
 
2 Tr. 51-52 (“Going up the road there was a woman that kept flashing her lights at me and zipping in front 
of me and zipping behind me. I honestly don’t know what she had a problem with. She either thought I 
had cut her off or did something. I don’t know.”); see also Tr. 69. 
 
4 
 
and traffic was congested and heavy. A police officer drove up and asked why he was 
stopped on the side of the roadway because he was holding up traffic. The other driver 
drove away. Applicant explained what had happened and the officer told him what he 
was doing could be considered aggressive driving. Applicant was cited for driving off the 
roadway while passing a vehicle. (Answer; Tr. 51-53, 67-71; GE 8) Applicant had not 
been drinking prior to that incident. (Tr. 70) Although not alleged, Applicant’s driver’s 
license was suspended in August 2015 when he failed to pay the ticket within 30 days. 
(GE 8) In September 2015, he was found guilty and fined $110. (SOR ¶ 2.b) He paid 
the ticket and his license was restored. (GE 8)  
 
 In November 2016, on the day before Thanksgiving, Applicant was running late 
while driving to a family member’s house. He was stopped for “failure to obey traffic 
control device” (i.e., for speeding). He was driving about 60 miles an hour in a 45 mile-
an-hour zone. Applicant received a $90 ticket. He acknowledged at hearing that he 
threw the ticket on the floor of the car because he was “still in a rush” at the time. 
Because Applicant did not pay the ticket within 30 days, his driver’s license was again 
suspended in December 2016, (SOR ¶ 2.c) although he said he was not aware of it. 
(Answer; Tr. 53-55, 61; GE 9)  
 
 In March 2017, Applicant was driving to a family member’s house at the end of 
the workday. He and another driver were approaching each other from opposite sides of 
the road. They were both “crowding the center line,” and they swerved to avoid hitting 
each other. Applicant kept going, but the other driver did a U-turn and drove after him. 
They both pulled over, and the other driver “just started screaming [and] yelling about 
how I had hit him.” The other driver claimed that “we clipped mirrors” but Applicant 
denied that their vehicles had made any contact. (Answer; Tr. 56-57) The other driver’s 
wife remained in their car. (Tr. 77) 
 
 Applicant testified that when he examined the other driver’s mirror and mirror 
casing at the scene, he saw “a nick in the paint on his mirror,” as might have been 
caused if a rock in the road had hit the paint and chipped it. (Tr. 72, 78) Applicant was 
driving a pickup truck and the other vehicle was an SUV, so the two mirrors were about 
the same height. (Tr. 75) 
 
AE A includes pictures Applicant took of his own driver’s-side mirror, including 
the front casing. He took the pictures the next morning at his insurance company’s 
request. During his testimony, Applicant used AE A to demonstrate where the “nick in 
the paint” was on the front of the mirror casing on the other vehicle. (Tr. 78-79) There 
are no photos of the other vehicle in evidence in this proceeding. The photos in AE A do 
not show any noticeable damage to Applicant’s vehicle.  
 
 The two drivers continued their roadside argument, but at some point Applicant 
drove away. Applicant did not give the other driver his insurance information “because 
I’m not paying for something I didn’t do.” (Tr. 58, 72, 79) After Applicant left, the other 
driver called the police. The next morning, Applicant’s insurance company called and 
asked about the incident. Applicant took the photos (AE A) and submitted them. He said 
 
5 
 
that the insurance company later denied the claim because they didn’t see any damage 
and concluded that Applicant had not hit the other car. (Tr. 58, 81) 
 
 Applicant was contacted by the police soon thereafter. He was cited for failing to 
drive right of center and for failing to stop after an accident involving damage to an 
attended vehicle. (GE 10; GE 12) He was also charged with driving on a suspended 
license when records showed his license was suspended due to the unpaid ticket from 
November 2016. (SOR ¶ 2.d) (GE 11) (Tr. 58-59)  
 
Applicant testified that he was not aware until then that his license had been 
suspended. (Tr. 61) He paid the overdue ticket in June 2017, and his license was 
restored. (Tr. 59, 73-74; AE A) He testified that he had not been drinking prior to the 
incident. (Tr. 73) 
 
 Applicant went to court in October 2017. On the advice of counsel, he pleaded 
guilty to the charge of failing to stop after the accident. He was fined $147.50 and 
sentenced to one day of probation (the day of the court hearing). The other two charges 
were nolle prosequi. (Tr. 60-61, 73-74; AE A) 
 
 Since the record was left open after the hearing for other purposes (AE B; AE C), 
Applicant was also afforded the opportunity to submit post-hearing evidence such as 
letters of reference, for consideration under the whole person concept. (Tr. 86-87) 
Applicant did not do so. 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.3 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”4 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
                                                          
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
4 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following disqualifying condition is applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with an alcohol 
use disorder.  
 
 Applicant committed three alcohol-related offenses between 1994 and 2012. All 
of them involved charges of either DUI, DWI, or both. AG ¶ 22(a) applies. The 
December 2012 accident was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and the resulting charges were 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. SOR ¶ 1.b is therefore found for Applicant as duplicative.5  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
                                                          
5 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice).  
 
 
7 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 Applicant incurred three alcohol-related DUI/DWI offenses, in 1994, 2010, and 
2012. All of them occurred after he had been drinking in social situations.  
  
 Applicant’s explanations on his SCA and in testimony about the circumstances of 
the 2010 arrest were fairly consistent. Both times, he averred that the charge was 
dismissed. This was erroneous. In fact, the DWI charge was nolle prosequi, but he 
pleaded guilty to DUI, and received PBJ and a fine.  
 
 Applicant has not had any alcohol-related offenses since his December 2012 
accident and DUI, about five-and-a-half years before the hearing. He documented that 
he completed an alcohol counseling and education program successfully, in early 2013. 
Since then, Applicant also altered his drinking habits, and no longer drinks if he might 
be driving. He does not drink to intoxication. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. Applicant 
provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol involvement security concerns.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 
8 
 
 Applicant’s three alcohol-related offenses are cross-alleged as criminal conduct 
under SOR ¶ 2.a. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(b) apply to them.  
 
 The remaining allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d) all occurred more recently, 
between July 2015 and March 2017. Like the DUIs, all of them involved misconduct 
while driving, though none of them involved alcohol. Applicant failed to pay the 
November 2016 speeding ticket, so his license was suspended. These citations, with 
the prior DUIs, establish a pattern of questionable judgment and inability to comply with 
rules and regulations. AG ¶ 31(a) is therefore satisfied, even though the fines on their 
own “would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.” They 
also satisfy AG ¶ 31(b), given Applicant’s admissions and the other record evidence.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions for criminal conduct are potentially applicable, 
under AG ¶ 32:   
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 As discussed above, I found the alcohol-offenses mitigated under Guideline G. 
However, though I no longer have security concerns about Applicant’s current alcohol 
consumption, that does not end the analysis. As the Appeal Board has noted, “an 
Applicant’s security-related conduct can be alleged under more than one Guideline, 
and, in an appropriate case, can be given independent weight by an administrative 
judge under different Guidelines.”6 Such is the case here. I must also consider the total 
pattern of Applicant’s behavior, not just in a piecemeal fashion as a series of unrelated 
incidents.7  
 
 In that regard, all of the allegations have several things in common. They all 
involve instances of poor judgment and lack of impulse control when Applicant was 
driving. (A possible exception is the 2010 DUI offense, in which Applicant stated that his 
cohabitant had been driving when his car broke down. Nevertheless, it was he who 
pleaded guilty to the DUI charge). Two of the incidents involve altercations or disputes 
with other drivers. More generally, all of the incidents, and Applicant’s reaction to them, 
involve his failure to follow rules and regulations, whether related to alcohol or not.  
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 04-09251 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27. 2007).  
 
7 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-22563 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (regarding the need to avoid a 
piecemeal analysis). 
 
9 
 
 On multiple occasions (some alleged, some not), Applicant’s license was also 
suspended because he failed to pay the ticket in a timely manner. On one occasion, in 
2012, he was driving on an expired license (again, not alleged).8 
   
Given the relative similarity of Applicant’s various driving offenses, as well as 
their recency, I cannot conclude that they are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has not established a sufficient record of rehabilitation, to include 
passage of time without recurrence. He also provided no independent evidence of his 
good employment record or constructive community involvement to be considered in 
weighing rehabilitation, mitigation, or under the whole person concept. I cannot 
conclude that AG ¶ 32(d) should apply. Applicant did not meet his burden to establish 
that the criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(c):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G and Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. While the security concerns 
over Applicant’s alcohol consumption are mitigated, Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns, all of which arise from his 
repeated instances of poor judgment, lack of impulse control, and failure to follow rules 
and regulations when he gets behind the wheel of a car. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                          
8 Where conduct is not alleged in the SOR, I cannot consider such evidence as disqualifying conduct. 
However, I can consider that evidence in weighing mitigation or changed circumstances, whether 
Applicant has demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation, under the whole person concept, and in weighing 
Applicant’s credibility. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
