 
1                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ADP Case No. 17-00263 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 16 delinquent debts totaling 
$48,787. This total includes eight student loans totaling $34,640. In July 2018, all of his 
delinquent debts, except for his student loans, were discharged under Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code. He is making payments to address his student loan debts. Financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On March 14, 2016, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire 
for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF-86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On 
September 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DOD 
Personnel Security Program (PSP) (effective April 3, 2017), and Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG) (effective June 8, 2017).   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
 
2                                         
 
access to sensitive information, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether his access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth trustworthiness 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
On October 24, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he did not 
request a hearing. (HE 3) Department Counsel requested a hearing. On July 13, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice setting the hearing for 
July 30, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant waived any issue relating to the timeliness of the notice of 
hearing. (Tr. 14-15) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video teleconference. 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits; Applicant offered three exhibits; there were no 
objections; and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Transcript (Tr.) 16-23; GE 1-GE 
6; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE C) On August 6, 2018, DOHA received a transcript of the 
hearing.     
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, and 
1.h through 1.p. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant made 
some admissions in his discussion of the debt, and those admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Additional findings of fact follow.  
 
Applicant is 37-years-old, and he has been employed by a DOD contractor as a 
network specialist at a medical clinic from July 2017 to the present. (Tr. 6-7) In 2000, he 
graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) He has 126 college credits; however, he has not 
received a degree. (Tr. 6) He is majoring in network communication management. (Tr. 6) 
In 2001, he married, and in 2009, he divorced. (Tr. 8) Applicant’s son is 18 years old. (Tr. 
8) His monthly child support payment of $200 is current. (Tr. 8) He served on active duty 
in the Army from 2004 to 2009, including service in Iraq and Afghanistan. (Tr. 27, 45) He 
left active duty as a sergeant (E-5); his military occupational specialty was network nodal 
systems operator; and he received an honorable discharge. (Tr. 45-46)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant was unemployed from November 2009 to November 2011, from 
December 2012 to January 2013, from March 2013 to February 2014, from June 2014 to 
February 2015, and from February 2017 to July 2017. (Tr. 7, 23; GE 2) His first period of 
unemployment after leaving active duty was due largely to not looking for work as he was 
living on his savings. During his other periods of unemployment, his debts became 
delinquent. 
 
The SOR listed eight non-student loan debts totaling $14,147 as follows: ¶ 1.a is a 
debt placed for collection for $1,215; ¶ 1.b is a charged-off debt for $2,695; ¶ 1.c is a utility 
                                            
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Unless stated otherwise, the 
facts in the statement of facts are from Applicant’s January 29, 2016 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions or SF-86, Applicant’s March 22, 2016 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview, 
and FORM response. Items 4, 8, FORM response.    
 
 
3                                         
 
debt placed for collection for $595; ¶ 1.d is a debt placed for collection for $1,450; ¶ 1.e is 
a debt relating to repossession of a vehicle for $7,237; ¶ 1.f is a debt placed for collection 
for $786; ¶ 1.g is a charged-off debt for $64; and ¶ 1.p is a debt placed for collection for 
$105. 
 
In Applicant’s bankruptcy filing, his nonpriority unsecured debts, including his 
student loans, totaled $75,067. (GE 5) He did not disclose any delinquent taxes. (GE 5)    
 
The SOR listed eight student loans for college totaling $34,640. From September 
2015 to September 2017, when Applicant was employed, $507 monthly was garnished 
from Applicant’s pay for his student loan debt. (Tr. 31; AE A) After October 2017, he made 
five $194 payments, one $195 payment, one $89 payment, and one $237 payment to 
address his student loans. (Tr. 31; AE A) His current student loan balance is $32,838. (Tr. 
21-22, 28; AE A) He is awaiting a formal student loan payment plan from the creditor. (Tr. 
22) He made payments on his student loans almost every month that he was employed 
and his bankruptcy was not pending. 
 
Applicant’s gross annual income is about $69,000. (Tr. 37) Prior to his bankruptcy, 
Applicant paid two of the SOR debts. He paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g owed to a utility 
company for $64 and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.p owed to an insurance company for $105. (Tr. 
34; SOR response) Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney recommended that he seek a fresh 
financial start through bankruptcy. He received financial counseling during the bankruptcy 
process. (Tr. 39) In July 2018, all of his delinquent debts, except for his student loans, and 
car loan were resolved when they were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. (Tr. 22; AE B; GE 5; GE 6)2 
 
Applicant wants to return to college to complete his degree. (Tr. 29) He believes that 
his student loans must be in an established payment plan to enable him to obtain additional 
student loans to fund his college education. (Tr. 29) He has some Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) education benefits remaining that he can use to enroll in school. (Tr. 30) Once 
he has begun to attend college, he will be able to seek another deferral of his student loan 
payments until he completes his degree. (Tr. 30) He has maintained communications with 
his student loan creditor. (Tr. 33) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor has known Applicant for six months. (AE C) He described 
Applicant as “a huge asset” to mission accomplishment who is professional and diligent.  
He believes Applicant has learned from this financial experience and sincerely wants to 
take correction action to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 
                                            
2 I granted Department Counsel’s motion to amend the statement of reasons to add an allegation in 
paragraph 1.q that Applicant filed for bankruptcy in March 2018, and his debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in July 2018. (Tr. 40)  
 
4                                         
 
528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to classified information applies 
similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified information. As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security 
or other sensitive information and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently 
trustworthy to have access to such information. See Id. at 527. 
 
Positions formerly designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as noncritical-
sensitive positions and include those personnel “[w]ith access to automated systems that 
contain military active duty, guard, or reservists’ personally identifiable information or 
information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise protected from disclosure by 
DOD 5400.11-R where such access has the potential to cause serious damage to the 
national security.” DOD Manual 5200.02 ¶ 4.1a(3)(c).   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein 
and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to sensitive 
information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 
5                                         
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The evidence of record establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to 
resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents 
evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant 
to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard 
applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that articulated in Egan, supra. 
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Directive, 
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by his divorce in 2009 and five periods 
of unemployment in the previous 10 years. He was unemployed from November 2009 to 
November 2011, from December 2012 to January 2013, from March 2013 to February 
2014, from June 2014 to February 2015, and from February 2017 to July 2017.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal Board 
addressed a situation where an applicant was sporadically unemployed and lacked the 
ability to pay his creditors. The Appeal Board noted “it will be a long time at best before he 
has paid” all of his creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment compensation at 
the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a circumstance was not 
necessarily a bar to having access to classified information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required to 
be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given 
his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case No. 
08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a repayment 
plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate that plan.” Id. 
The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because it did not 
“articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the Administrative 
Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should have done under 
the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor financial condition, or 
 
7                                         
 
why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light of his limited 
circumstances.” Id.   
 
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply. Applicant financial situation was damaged by divorce 
and unemployment, which are circumstances beyond his control. Applicant paid two SOR 
debts, and he made several payments to address his student loans. Some payments were 
from garnishment of his salary, and some payments were made voluntarily after the 
garnishment ended. He has a plan for bringing his student loans to current status.  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney recommended that he seek a fresh financial start 
through bankruptcy. Resolution of debts through bankruptcy is a legally authorized means 
for resolving delinquent debt. The U.S. Bankruptcy Court website3 states: 
 
A fundamental goal of the federal bankruptcy laws enacted by Congress is 
to give debtors a financial “fresh start” from burdensome debts. The Supreme 
Court made this point about the purpose of the bankruptcy law in a 1934 
decision: “[I]t gives to the honest but unfortunate debtor … a new opportunity 
in life and a clear field for future effort, unhampered by the pressure and 
discouragement of preexisting debt.” Local Loan Co. v. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234, 
244 (1934). This goal is accomplished through the bankruptcy discharge, 
which releases debtors from personal liability from specific debts and 
prohibits creditors from ever taking any action against the debtor to collect 
those debts.  
 
 In July 2018, the bankruptcy court discharged Applicant’s nonpriority unsecured 
debts under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.4 As part of the bankruptcy process, he 
received financial counseling and generated a budget. 
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving his debts, future new 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” His payments to address some of his debts 
showed some good faith. He has sufficient income to keep his debts in current status and 
                                            
3 U.S. Bankruptcy Court website, Process - Bankruptcy Basics, http://www.uscourts.gov/services-
forms/bankruptcy/bankruptcy-basics/process-bankruptcy-basics. 
 
4 There is may be some duplication of debts in Applicant’s bankruptcy schedules. In a bankruptcy 
filing, most debtors list potential creditors, even when the debt may have been resold or transferred to a 
different collection agent or creditor, to ensure notice, and reduce the risk of subsequent dismissal of the 
bankruptcy. If Applicant failed to list some nonpriority unsecured debts on his bankruptcy schedule, this failure 
to list such debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset bankruptcy, all unsecured, 
nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court grants a discharge, even when they are not listed 
on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd v. Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue 
Service, Inc., 426 B.R. 398 (Bankr. S.D. FL 2010), but see First Circuit Bucks Majority on Discharge of 
Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 2009). There is no 
requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier on Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & 
Company, Inc., 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a)(3)(A). Some categories of priority obligations are listed on 
bankruptcy schedules, but in most cases are not discharged by bankruptcy, such as tax debts, student loan 
debts, and child support obligations. 
 
8                                         
 
to continue making progress paying his remaining debts. I am confident that Applicant will 
conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient 
to mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity 
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a public trust 
position “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration” of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 37-years-old, and he has been employed by a DOD contractor as a 
network specialist at a medical clinic from July 2017 to the present. He has 126 college 
credits; however, he has not received a degree. He is majoring in network communication 
management. In 2009, he divorced. His son is 18 years old, and his monthly child support 
payment of $200 is current. He served on active duty in the Army from 2004 to 2009, 
including service in Iraq and Afghanistan. He left active duty as a sergeant, and he received 
an honorable discharge.  
 
Applicant’s supervisor has known Applicant for six months. He described Applicant 
as “a huge asset” to mission accomplishment who is professional and diligent. He believes 
Applicant has learned from this experience and wants to take correction action to resolve 
his financial problems. 
 
Applicant had five periods of unemployment in the last 10 years. He paid two SOR 
debts, and he made payments to address his student loans. He has a plan to bring his 
student loan debt to current status. In July 2018, his non-priority, unsecured debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. All of his debts except for his student 
loans are in current status. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-
person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
 
9                                         
 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate 
that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) 
(Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.) There 
is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). He understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial circumstances to 
address his delinquent debts. Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
DOD Manual 5200.02, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the 
whole person. I conclude that financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are 
mitigated. It is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
