 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04387 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and substance misuse and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
September 5, 2017. On January 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on March 7, 2018. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM and filed Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A in 
response. Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 to 4 and AE A are admitted into evidence. The 
case was assigned to me on July 25, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old interior designer employed by a defense contractor since 
February 2013. She received a bachelor’s degree in 2012. She is unmarried and has not 
previously held a security clearance. 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from 2006 to 2017; cocaine from 2010 
to 2017; Adderall without a prescription from 2011 to 2017; and ecstasy from 2012 to 
2015. It also cross-alleges these allegations under Guideline E. Applicant admitted the 
SOR allegations and vowed to cease all future use.  
 
 Applicant reported her history of illegal drug use in her SCA. She began using 
marijuana in high school, but increased the frequency of use to about once per month 
after graduating from college and securing employment. She used cocaine a few times 
per year to 2017, ecstasy about two times between 2012 and 2015, and Adderall about 
five to six times with friends while at parties. She stopped illegal drug use about two 
months before completing her SCA to obtain a security clearance. Although Applicant 
stated her intent to cease all further illegal drug use, she has not sought drug counseling 
and she continues to associate with friends with whom she most recently used marijuana. 
 
 Applicant admits to her “questionable decisions” and vowed to not use illegal 
substances again. She discussed passing a professional licensing exam and work she 
has recently accomplished. She also said that she has taken up a physically-fit lifestyle 
and lost weight. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
 
3 
 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.3 
In Department of Navy v. Egan4, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is 
less than a preponderance of the evidence.5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” It is well-established law 
that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, 
“the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the 
Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
6 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying condition potentially applicable in this case includes: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition). 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal drug use from 2006 to 2017.  Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25 (a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Applicant’s history of illegal drug use included use up to two months before 
completing her SCA to obtain a security clearance. Her use included marijuana, cocaine, 
ecstasy, and Adderall, including drug use while working for a government contractor. 
 
 Although Applicant may still be considered a young adult, her history of illegal drug 
use is recent and continued for five years after graduating from college, with increased 
use after graduating. She stopped her use to obtain a security clearance, but a college 
graduate and working professional seeking a security clearance is expected to follow laws 
against illegal drug use, support a drug-free workplace, and have a history of good 
judgment. Her use of illegal drugs until 2017 does not display the judgment expected of 
an adult, and insufficient time has passed since she abstained. Applicant has not sought 
or received drug counseling, she continues to associate with friends that use marijuana, 
and did not submit a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse per the Directive. She expressed an understanding of the 
Government’s concerns with her past drug use and vowed to cease all future use, but 
there has been insufficient time since her last drug use and a change in lifestyle to warrant 
application of mitigating credit. 
 
Applicant’s history of illegal drug use and failure to submit convincing evidence in 
mitigation, raise serious questions about her willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, and her overall maturity and judgment. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
  The relevant disqualifying condition under AG ¶16 is: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
6 
 
  Applicant’s history of illegal drug use as noted in the findings of fact, invokes an 
assessment of questionable judgment and personal conduct that creates a vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ (e) applies. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Applicant’s history of illegal drug use, taken as a whole, shows a pattern of 
unmitigated conduct that has not ceased long enough to apply mitigating credit. Despite 
her recent claims of abstinence, Applicant’s judgment remains questionable until she can 
show a significant change in lifestyle for a credible period of time. Based on the same 
analysis under Guideline H, above, I find no mitigating conditions under Guideline E fully 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
7 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated the evidence, my findings of fact, and 
comments under Guidelines H and E in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant’s history of recent illegal drug use without convincing evidence in 
mitigation, leaves me with serious questions about her future intent and willingness to 
follow rules and regulations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
