 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03266 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns relating to her 
connections to Jordan and United Arab Emirates (UAE). She contributed to U.S. 
national security for seven years by serving as a linguist in the Middle East. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On November 15, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017.   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
On December 27, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 64; HE 3) On March 16, 2018, Department Counsel was ready 
to proceed. On April 26, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On May 23, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for June 12, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. 
Applicant’s counsel indicated there were no issues regarding notice. (Tr. 9) 
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits; Applicant offered 
19 exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. (Tr. 10-13; GE 1-2; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE S). On June 21, 2018, DOHA 
received a transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered summaries for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Jordan and 
UAE with supporting attachments. (Tr. 10-12; HE 5-HE 6) Administrative or official 
notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR 
Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 
(App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Applicant did not object to 
me taking administrative notice of the proffered documents and obtaining information 
from the Department of State website. (Tr. 16) Department Counsel did not object to 
information from the State Department website. Department Counsel’s requests for 
administrative notice are granted. (Tr. 12) 
 
The first paragraph and the last paragraph of the Jordan section are taken from 
U.S. State Department Background Notes, https://2001-2009.state.gov/p/sca/ci/af/. (Tr. 
16-17) The other paragraphs regarding Jordan and UAE are from Department 
Counsel’s administrative notice requests (quotation marks, bullet symbols, and internal 
footnotes are omitted).  
     
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. (HE 3) She also 
provided mitigating information. (HE 3) Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
                                            
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old linguist, and a DOD contractor has employed her for 
seven years in a Middle Eastern country primarily in support of the U.S. Army. (Tr. 14, 
16-17) She grew up in Kuwait, and moved to Jordan with her family when she was 13 
years old. (Tr. 37) Her father was a teacher. (Tr. 38) In 2015, she received a bachelor’s 
degree in human relations from an Internet-based U.S. university. (Tr. 14-15; AE D; AE 
G; AE H) She was married from 1996 to 2000 and from 2006 to 2010. (Tr. 15, 38) She 
does not have any children. (Tr. 16) Her second marriage was to a U.S.-born citizen. 
(Tr. 16, 50) Her biography, resume, and SCA provide further details of her background 
and employment history. (GE1; AE D; AE E) 
 
The SOR alleges and the record establishes: (1) Applicant’s mother, brother, and 
two sisters are citizens and residents of Jordan. (Tr. 20); (2) Her brother is a citizen of 
Jordan and a resident of UAE. (Tr. 31); (3) She provides about $350 monthly to her 
mother. (Tr. 22-24); and (4) She provides about $250 monthly to her brother who 
resides in Jordan to help pay for the education of his children. (Tr. 28-29, 45). None of 
her relatives work for a foreign government. (Tr. 22, 27, 29) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Israel. (AE D) Her father had two 
bachelor’s degrees and a master’s degree. (AE D) In 2007, her father passed away. 
(AE R) In addition to the relatives discussed in the SOR, Applicant has sisters-in-law 
and nieces and nephews living in Jordan and UAE. (Tr. 28, 34, 45-46)  
 
From 2001 to 2006, Applicant was employed in Qatar. (Tr. 39) In 2006, Applicant 
came to the United States because she was married to a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 18) She lived 
in the United States from 2006 until 2010. (Tr. 18, 40) From 2008 to 2010, a DOD 
contractor employed her as a linguist and role player in the United States. (Tr. 41) In 
2009, she became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 17; AE J) She has been consistently deployed to 
the Middle East from 2011 to present, but not in Jordan or UAE. (Tr. 19, 42) She 
planned to return to the Middle East the day after her hearing. (Tr. 19) She has held a 
U.S. security clearance since 2010. (Tr. 20) 
 
Applicant communicates several times a month with family members in Jordan, 
including her mother and siblings. (Tr. 21, 25, 31, 33, 44-45) 2 She most recently visited 
her mother and other family members in Jordan in 2016. (Tr. 21, 26, 44) She most 
recently visited her brother in UAE in 2016. (Tr. 32) Her sisters-in-law and sisters are 
not employed outside their homes. (Tr. 32-33)  
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $4,000. (Tr. 46) Her only foreign bank account 
was located near her employment location, and she opened the account to enable her 
employer to pay her salary. (Tr. 47-48) She said the foreign bank account was a 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
requirement of her employer at that time. (Tr. 48) She currently does not have a foreign 
bank account because her employer does not require her to have one. (Tr. 48) She has 
a bank account in the United States. (Tr. 48) She does not own a home in the United 
States. (Tr. 49) She has more than $7,000 in her employer-sponsored 401(k) account. 
(AE Q) 
 
Applicant has an uncle and cousins that live in the United States. (Tr. 50) In 
2011, she renounced her Jordanian citizenship. (Tr. 51-52; AE L) She is proud to be an 
American citizen and employee of a DOD contractor. (Tr. 52)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided character statements from one staff sergeant, two sergeants 
first class, one chief warrant officer 3, two captains, five majors, and one lieutenant 
colonel who served with Applicant during their deployments to a Middle Eastern 
country.3 The general sense of their statements is that Applicant’s duty performance 
demonstrated professionalism, trustworthiness, competence, loyalty, dedication, and 
diligence. She provided crucial support to the mission accomplishment of the U.S. Army 
in the Middle Eastern country. Ten certificates laud her contributions to U.S. Army units 
as a linguist from 2011 to 2018. 
 
Jordan 
 
In 2013 and 2014, the U.S. provided Jordan $2.25 billion in loan guarantees, 
allowing Jordan access to affordable financing from international capital markets. The 
U.S.-Jordan free trade agreement (FTA), the U.S.’s first FTA with an Arab country, has 
expanded the trade relationship by reducing barriers for services, providing cutting-edge 
protection for intellectual property, ensuring regulatory transparency, and requiring 
effective labor and environmental enforcement. The United States and Jordan have an 
“open skies” civil aviation agreement; a bilateral investment treaty; a science and 
technology cooperation agreement; and a memorandum of understanding on nuclear 
energy cooperation. Such agreements bolster efforts to help diversify Jordan’s economy 
and promote growth. Jordan and the United States belong to a number of the same 
international organizations, including the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, 
World Bank, and World Trade Organization. Jordan also is a Partner for Cooperation 
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
 
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy ruled by 
King Abdullah II bin Hussein.  
 
  The U.S. Department of State assesses the threat of terrorism in Jordan as high; 
with the capital of Amman currently assessed as a high-threat location for terrorist 
activity directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. Transnational and 
indigenous terrorist groups in Jordan have demonstrated the capability to plan and 
                                            
3 The character statements referenced in this paragraph are at AE N and the certificates are at 
AE P. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
implement attacks. Violent extremist groups in Syria and Iraq, including the Islamic 
State of lraq and the Levant (ISIL) (also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or 
ISIS) and Jabhat al-Nusra, have conducted attacks in Jordan and continue to plot 
against local security forces, U.S. and Western interests, and soft targets such as high-
profile public events, hotels, places of worship, restaurants, schools, and malls.  
Jordan’s prominent role in the effort to defeat ISIS, and its shared borders with Iraq and 
Syria, increase the potential for future terrorist incidents. 
 
Although Jordan remained a committed partner on counterterrorism and 
countering violent extremism in 2016, numerous terrorist incidents reflect the current 
security situation in Jordan: throughout 2017, multiple vehicle-borne improvised 
explosive devices detonated in and around a refugee camp in Syria near the Jordanian 
border; and in October 2017, two homemade explosive devices were found in another 
refugee camp in Jordan. Also in October 2017, the State Security Court prosecuted six 
people for sympathizing with ISIS, after they created social media accounts to find 
Jordanian supporters for ISIS and promote terrorist activity. In September 2017, the 
State Security Court charged 16 people with a terrorist plot involving the use of 
automatic weapons to carry out terrorist attacks against public security services; and the 
Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate arrested a 10-person ISIS cell that was 
planning to attack security forces and tourist locations using explosive suicide belts. 
Throughout 2017, there were numerous instances of extremists posting pro-ISIS videos 
or statements on social media.  
 
U.S. involvement in Iraq and Syria, and the U.S. Government’s policies on Israel, 
have fueled anti-American feelings in Jordan. Recent surveys reflect that over 80% of 
the Jordanian population has an unfavorable view of the U.S. Government. The U.S. 
Department of State has assessed Amman as being a high-threat location for political 
violence directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. In December 2017, 
protests took place at the U.S. Embassy for 27 days after the announcement that the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv would move to Jerusalem. 
 
As a regional leader in the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, Jordan played an 
important role in Coalition successes in degrading the terrorist group’s territorial control 
and operational reach. During 2016, Jordanian authorities took legal action against 
numerous individuals accused of terrorism under Jordanian law. On July 13, 2016, the 
Jordanian State Security Court filed charges against 21 suspected ISIS affiliates in 
connection with the pre-emptive March raid on an alleged ISIS safe house in lrbid. The 
Department of State assesses that the potential for terrorist activity is heightened as 
Jordan participates in the coalition against ISIS. Extremist groups have carried out 
terrorist activities against U.S. and Jordanian government targets in Jordan. 
 
Terrorist groups often do not distinguish between U.S. Government personnel 
and private U.S. citizens, and may target areas frequented by Westerners, such as 
tourist sites, hotels, restaurants, shopping malls, and transportation hubs. 
 
According to the Department of State 2017 Human Rights Report, Jordan’s most 
significant continuing human rights problems include allegations of torture by security 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and government officials; arbitrary arrest and detention, including of activists and 
journalists; infringements on privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of expression; and 
restrictions on freedom of association and assembly. Impunity remained widespread, 
and the government did not take sufficiently strong steps to investigate, prosecute, or 
punish officials who committed abuses.   
 
The Jordanian SSC took legal action against numerous individuals deemed to be 
terrorists under local law, including the arrest and prosecution of men accused of 
seeking to join Al-Nusra Front (ANF) and ISIS. Other arrests and prosecutions involved 
supporting/recruiting for ISIS and attempted travel to/from Syria in  support of extremist 
activities and also for “propagating ISIL ideology,” a charge often used for online 
activity. 
 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
 
The Trucial States of the Persian Gulf coast granted the United Kingdom control 
of their defense and foreign affairs in 19th century treaties. In 1971, six of these states - 
Abu Dhabi, ‘Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy, and Umm al Qaywayn merged 
to form the United Arab Emirates (UAE). They were joined in 1972 by Ra’s al Khaymah.  
 
The UAE in recent years has played a growing role in regional affairs. In addition 
to donating billions of dollars in economic aid to help stabilize Egypt, the UAE was one 
of the first countries to join the Defeat-ISIS coalition, and is a key partner in a Saudi-led 
military campaign in Yemen.  
 
 The UAE’s State Security Court heard more than three dozen terrorism-related 
cases in 2016, making it the most active year to date in terrorism prosecutions. The 
majority of prosecutions were against alleged affiliates of ISIS, AQAP, al-Nusrah Front 
(al-Qa’ida’s affiliate in Syria), and Hizballah.  
 
In March 2016, the State Security Court concluded a terrorism trial that involved 
the Shabab al Manara group and included 41 defendants, 38 of whom were Emirati.  
The defendants were prosecuted for their association with terrorist groups, including 
ISIS and al-Qa’ida, and for planning terrorist attacks in the UAE. The State Security 
Court, convicted numerous defendants, and ordered the dissolution of the group, the 
closure of its headquarters, the confiscation of electronic devices used in cybercrimes, 
weapons, ammunition, materials used in making explosives, and wireless devices, and 
the closure of any affiliated websites.  
 
The UAE is a regional and global financial and transportation hub, and terrorist 
organizations exploit it to send and receive financial support. Operational capability 
constraints and political considerations sometimes prevented the UAE government from 
immediately freezing and confiscating terrorist assets absent multilateral assistance. 
Exploitation by illicit actors of money transmitters, including licensed exchange houses, 
hawalas, and trading firms acting as money transmitters, are a significant concern. 
Additionally, international human rights organizations claim that the UAE uses its 
counterterrorism laws as cover to pursue cases against political dissidents and activists. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 As the following examples demonstrate, through transshipment and diversion of 
United States goods, dual-use, military, and electronic components and internet 
technology have passed through the UAE and UAE-owned businesses on their way to 
Iran and Syria. 
 
Between 2005 and 2007, United States companies were misled into shipping 
aircraft parts to the UAE that were actually destined for customers in Iran. Iran is a state 
sponsor of terrorism. In 2008, United States dual-use and military components were 
funneled through the UAE to Iran and ended up in improvised explosive devices (IEDs) 
used against Coalition Forces in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
 
In 2009, a United States company conspired to export a steel bar peeling 
machine to Iran, through the UAE, in violation of the lran embargo. In 2014, a UAE 
company violated its reseller agreement with a United States software company and 
illegally diverted internet-monitoring technology to Syria. Syria is a state sponsor of 
terrorism. In 2016, high-tech electronic components from United States companies were 
illegally transshipped through the UAE on their way to Iran.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
The SOR alleges and the record establishes Applicant’s mother, brother, and two 
sisters are citizens and residents of Jordan. Her brother is a citizen on Jordan and a 
resident of UAE. She provides about $600 monthly to her family in Jordan which is less 
than 20 percent of her income. None of her relatives work for a foreign government. 
Applicant has frequent contacts with her mother and siblings, who are citizens and 
residents of Jordan and UAE. Her frequent contacts and financial support are a 
manifestation of her care and concern for her relatives living in Jordan and UAE.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security [or trustworthiness] eligibility. Direct or 
objective evidence of nexus is not required.”  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. 
June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Jordan and UAE 
primarily because of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in the 
dangers of service in the Middle East on behalf of the DOD for more than seven years, 
and she is willing to do so in the future. Numerous linguists, supporting U.S. forces, 
have family living in the Middle East. Thousands of United States and coalition armed 
forces and civilian contractors serving in the Middle East are targets of terrorists.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives living in Jordan or UAE is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his 
or her spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 08-
02864 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (discussing problematic visits of applicant’s 
father to Iran).4  
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, her or her immediate family members, and this presumption includes in-
                                            
4 In accordance with “well established DoD policy [Applicant and her family’s] religious affiliation 
play[ed] no part” in this decision. ISCR Case No. 08-06795 at 6 n. 3 (App. Bd. May 25, 2012). 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
laws. ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 05-
00939 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 
20, 2002). The in-law presumption concerning foreign influence is not relevant here 
because Applicant is not married.   
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for Guideline B cases, “the nature of the 
foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government 
are among the important considerations that provide context for the other record 
evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. 
The country’s human rights record is another important consideration.” ISCR Case No. 
16-02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 
2017)). Another factor is the nature of a nation’s government’s relationship with the 
United States. These criteria are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members living in that country are vulnerable to government coercion or 
inducement.  
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law 
including widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, 
terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Jordan and UAE with the United States, and the situation in those 
countries, places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that 
her relationship with any family member living in those countries does not pose a 
security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she might be forced 
to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a relative living in 
or visiting Jordan or UAE.5  
 
Guideline B security concerns are not limited to countries hostile to the United 
States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. 
May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 03-24933, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 346 at *20-*21 n. 18 (App. 
Bd. 2005), explained how relatives in a foreign country have a security significance: 
 
The issue under Guideline B is not whether an applicant’s immediate family members in 
a foreign country are of interest to a foreign power based on their prominence or personal 
situation. Rather, the issue is whether an applicant’s ties and contacts with immediate 
family members in a foreign country raise security [or trustworthiness] concerns because 
those ties and contacts create a potential vulnerability that a foreign power could seek to 
exploit in an effort to get unauthorized access to U.S. classified information that an 
applicant -- not the applicant’s immediate family members -- has by virtue of a security 
clearance [or public trust position]. A person may be vulnerable to influence or pressure 
exerted on, or through, the person’s immediate family members -- regardless of whether 
the person’s family members are prominent or not. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2004)) (discussing Taiwan). 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists 
from or in Jordan or UAE seek or have sought classified or economic information from 
or through Applicant or her family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Jordan and UAE have 
a problem with terrorism. Applicant’s family in Jordan and UAE “could be a means 
through which Applicant comes to the attention of those who seek U.S. information or 
technology and who would attempt to exert coercion upon him [or her].” ADP Case No. 
14-01655 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 3 (App. Bd. 
May 14, 2015)).  
Applicant’s relationships with relatives who are living in Jordan and UAE or 
visiting those countries create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists could 
place pressure on her family in Jordan or UAE in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships with family in Jordan 
and UAE and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(f) apply. Applicant has frequent contact with her relatives, who 
are citizens and residents of Jordan and UAE. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant 
resided in the United States for about four years (2006 to 2010).6 In 2009, she became 
a U.S. citizen. She has a bank account and 401(k) account in the United States. She 
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 17-00629 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018) the Appeal Board discussed a translator’s 
multiple tours on behalf of the United States in Iraq, limited time as a resident in the United States, and 
connections to family living in Iraq. The Appeal Board stated: 
     
In general, an applicant’s deployment to a combat zone in support of U.S. forces is not a 
factor that weighs against his or her national security eligibility. On the contrary, such 
deployments tend to establish various mitigating conditions such as [Directive] ¶ 8(b) 
(“there is no conflict of interest . . . because . . . the individual has such deep and 
longstanding loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest”); [Directive] ¶ 8(d) (“the foreign . . . 
activities are on U.S. Government business”); and [Directive] ¶ 8(f) (“the value or routine 
nature of the foreign business . . . is such that [it is] unlikely to result in a conflict of 
interest and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.”) 
 
Id. at 3 (internal footnotes omitted) (remanding administrative judge’s denial of security clearance). 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
provides $600 monthly to family in Jordan, which is less than 20 percent of her income. 
Her employment for seven years as a linguist on behalf of the United States in a Middle 
East country is a strong indication of her U.S. connections.       
 
Applicant’s years of support to the DOD as a linguist and cultural advisor, 
including the dangers that service entailed, weigh towards mitigating security concerns. 
Applicant is currently serving in the Middle East providing critical assistance to U.S. 
Armed Forces. She has offered to continue to risk her life to support the United States’ 
goals in the Middle East. She has shown her patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United 
States during her seven years of support to DOD while serving in the Middle East.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 17-00629 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018), the Appeal Board 
cogently explained the relevance of such service on behalf of the United States: 
 
Such evidence demonstrates that Applicant has repeatedly been willing to 
assume a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S. and shows his [or her] 
ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could be sufficiently strong enough 
to support a favorable application of mitigating condition 8(b). See ISCR 
Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006). . . . See also ISCR 
Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-
00034 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008); and ISCR Case No. 10-02803 at 6 
(App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012).  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Jordan and UAE. Her mother and siblings, and her siblings’ families 
reside in Jordan and UAE. Like every other resident of those countries, they are at risk 
from terrorists. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ investment of manpower and 
money in Jordan and UAE, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
the Middle East. Applicant’s family living in Jordan and UAE are potential targets of 
terrorists, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically 
add risk to her relatives living in Jordan and UAE from lawless elements in those 
countries.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to her relatives living in Jordan and UAE are less 
significant than her connections to the United States. Her employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, performance of linguist duties in the Middle East, and U.S. citizenship 
are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. She has not 
visited her relatives in Jordan or UAE for two years. She renounced her Jordanian 
citizenship. Her connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.   
 
 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency 
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the 
conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline B are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old linguist, and a DOD contractor has employed her for 
seven years in a Middle Eastern country primarily in support of the U.S. Army. In 2015, 
she received a bachelor’s degree in human relations from an Internet-based U.S. 
university. She is not married, and she does not have any children. 
 
Applicant has frequent contact with her family, who are citizens and residents of 
Jordan and UAE. She provided $600 monthly in financial support to her family in Jordan. 
Her frequent contacts with family in Jordan and UAE are a manifestation of her care and 
concern for her relatives living in those countries. There is no evidence that her relatives 
residing in those countries are government employees or military personnel. Those 
relationships raise important foreign influence security concerns, and they must be 
balanced against her connections to the United States.      
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, or cultural advisor for seven years in the 
Middle East. She provided character references from personnel who served with her in 
the Middle East including from three noncommissioned officers, one chief warrant officer, 
and 8 commissioned officers. The general sense of their statements is that Applicant’s 
duty performance exhibited professionalism, trustworthiness, competence, loyalty, 
dedication, and diligence. She provided crucial support to mission accomplishment. Ten 
certificates laud her contributions to U.S. Army units as a linguist from 2011 to 2018. 
 
Service with U.S. forces in the Middle East entails risk. Her voluntary acceptance 
of personal risk on behalf of the United States increases the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent 
group to coerce or exploit her. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 
2008). Her past honorable service as a linguist weighs heavily towards mitigating foreign 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
influence security concerns. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) 
(affirming grant of security clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a 
translator and as a cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing 
tensions and facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put his life in 
danger on at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
While Applicant did not serve as a translator in Iraq or Afghanistan, she served with U.S. 
forces in the Middle East, and that service poses more risk to her of death or serious 
injury to her from terrorists than in many other areas of the world.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Jordan and UAE must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers there.7 Jordan and UAE are dangerous places 
because of the potential for violence from terrorists. Terrorists continue to threaten the 
interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and assist 
the United States. The Jordan and UAE governments do not fully comply with the rule of 
law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and those two 
governments are allies in the war on terrorism. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is  clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
