1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 17-01874 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was unaware of his financial delinquencies when he completed his 
security clearance application. Consequently, when he did not include them on his security 
clearance application, he demonstrated no intent to falsify. There are no personal conduct 
security concerns. Applicant has either satisfied his delinquencies, or is satisfying them 
through payment plans. He has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 8, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct, 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017.
 
2 
 
 On July 20, 2017, Applicant admitted in part and denied in part subparagraphs 1.a, 
1.b, 1.e, and 1.g through 1.h, and denied the remainder of the SOR allegations. He 
requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. On June 
4, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, 
scheduling Applicant’s case for June 28, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. I 
received eight Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 8) and 24 Applicant’s exhibits (AE A - AE 
X). At the close of the hearing, I left the record open until July 9, 2018, for Applicant’s 
counsel to submit exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted two exhibits which I 
incorporated into the record as AE Y and AE Z.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 9, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old man with two adult children and two stepchildren. He is a 
high school graduate who has earned three years of college credits. He has been married 
to his current wife since 2008. (Tr. 21)  A previous marriage ended in divorce. He served in 
the U.S. Marine Corps from 1989 to 2003, then joined the Army, where he served through 
his honorable retirement in 2006. While in the Army, he served in a combat theater from 
January 2004 to December 2004. (Tr. 24) He was a team leader of a platoon whose duties 
included hunting for and destroying improvised explosive devices. (AE P at 7) After leaving 
the Army, Applicant worked for various defense contractors for six years, modifying and 
repairing Humvees. (Tr. 26) Since 2014, Applicant has been working for a defense 
contractor as a logistics analyst. His duties involve primarily contract procurement. He has 
held a security clearance since 2005. (AE Q at 4)  
 
 Applicant is highly respected on the job and in his community. (AE P) In May 2014, 
he won an award for outstanding customer service. (AE P at 11) His manager routinely 
delegates supervisory responsibilities to Applicant when he is out of the office, including a 
six-week period when he was out of the office on medical disability. During this time, 
Applicant “was instrumental in ensuring the continuity of operations” in three facilities 
across two states. (AE P at 12) 
 
 When Applicant was in the armed services, and later, when he worked in a civilian 
capacity repairing Humvees, he spent approximately 75 per cent of his time away from 
home. His wife managed the family finances. She struggled, falling behind on many debts. 
She either did not inform Applicant, or she would, on occasion, ask him for money to pay a 
joint debt, then use the money to pay a personal debt. (AE P at 1)  
 
 By December 2016, Applicant’s wife, unbeknownst to him, had incurred 
approximately $41,000 of delinquent debt, as alleged in the SOR. Applicant‘s current job 
has no travel demands, which has enabled him, by June 2017 to begin managing the 
family finances. Since then, he has been making “slow, but steady” progress in reducing 
his delinquent debts. (Tr. 27) As of the hearing date, he had caught up on payments owed 
on a car note, as alleged in subparagraph 1.a (AE A), and had satisfied SOR 
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.g through 1.i, collectively totaling $1,416 (AEs E, X, K, L, M).   
  
3 
 
 The remaining debt, as alleged in subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d. 1.e, and 1.f, totals 
approximately $35,000. The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.b is the deficiency from a car 
that was repossessed in early 2017. (AE C) Applicant’s wife told him this debt was 
delinquent in 2016. He gave her the money to cover the bill, but she used it without his 
knowledge to pay some personal debts, and did not tell him that the car was going to be 
repossessed. (AE P at 1) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d is an allegedly delinquent car loan that Applicant used to finance 
the purchase of a car approximately ten years ago, totaling approximately $3,500. The 
basis of Applicant’s dispute is that he satisfied the loan in 2009 after the car was totaled, 
using a combination of reimbursement payments from his standard auto insurance 
company and his gap insurance policy.  In support of his dispute, he provided copies of the 
reimbursement checks from both companies. (AE F at 1-2) 
 
 The debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f total approximately $24,000. 
Applicant disputes them, contending that they are not his debts. He wrote each creditor 
comprehensive letters requesting any information establishing that he is the creditor, and 
informing them of his legal rights under the Fair Credit Reporting Act and the Fair Debt 
Collection Practices Act. (AE H; AE I) 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application on April 25, 2016. He did not 
include any of the debts alleged in the SOR in response to questions about his finances. 
Applicant contends that he was unaware of the delinquent debts when he completed the 
security clearance application because his wife, who then managed the finances, incurred 
them without his knowledge. 
 
 Applicant earns $78,000 per year. He supplements his income with disability 
payments received from the Department of Veterans Affairs for an injury he incurred while 
serving in a combat theater between 2009 and 2010. He completed a credit counseling 
course. (AE Y) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
4 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 1(d) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . .  An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems generates security concerns under AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for 
the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 For most of the period Applicant has been married, he has spent nearly all of his 
time away from home on various temporary duty assignments. Consequently, his wife 
handled the finances. When she began neglecting to pay bills timely, she did not tell him. 
In one instance when she shared a problem with an auto loan delinquency, she, asked for 
extra money to pay the bill, then used it to pay some of her personal bills, rather than to 
pay the car note. 
 
 Applicant’s current job requires no travel responsibilities. This has enabled him to 
begin managing his finances. Since beginning the new job, he has satisfied four of the five 
debts that he acknowledged, and has been paying the fifth one through monthly payments. 
Applicant has also completed financial counseling classes. I conclude AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 
20(d) apply.  
 
 Applicant has notified the creditor of each disputed debt in writing, with 
comprehensive dispute letters demanding to be provided copies of contractual 
agreements, and notifying them of his rights. With respect to the creditor alleged in 
subparagraph (d), he provided proof of the checks he received to pay the balance from his 
insurance companies after the car was totaled. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” Applicant’s omission of relevant financial information from his security 
6 
 
clearance application raises the question of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits, or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. 
 
 Given Applicant’s sterling character and history of exemplary military service, I 
conclude Applicant’s testimony that he was unaware that his wife was mismanaging the 
family finances while he was away from home working was credible. Applicant could 
certainly have communicated better with his wife about their finances during this period of 
his career. However, this error reflected carelessness, not deceit. Any security concern 
generated by his carelessness has been mitigated by the steps to rehabilitate his finances, 
as discussed in the financial considerations section, above. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Upon considering the cause of Applicant’s financial problems, and the presence of 
rehabilitation, I conclude that the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of the problem is 
minimal. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
