KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: From our review, the cited pages in the transcript, and the record as a whole, do not
establish bias, i.e., partiality for or against a party, predisposition to decide a case or issue
without regard to the merits, or other indicia of lack of impartiality. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00661.a1
DATE: 09/07/2018
DATE: September 7, 2018
In Re:
---------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00661
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
8, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 9, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased and whether
the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 57 years old, has worked for Federal contractors since retiring from the
military.  He has held a security clearance for about 40 years and has worked as a Facility Security
Officer (FSO).  He has Federal tax issues that date back a number of years.  These include a Federal
tax lien filed against him in the approximate amount of $21,800 for 2007-2009; past-due Federal
taxes totaling about $17,800 for 2010, 2011, and 2014; and a failure to filed his 2013 Federal income
tax return.  He attributed the tax lien to his tax preparer’s error in listing him as a 1099, instead of
a salaried, employee.  He believed he learned of that error in 2009.  He claimed he could not pay his
2007 tax debt, had a payment plan for it, but could not remember when the repayment plan began. 
He provided no documents to substantiate the repayment plan.  
Applicant testified that he did not owe Federal taxes for 2010 and 2011.  Copies of IRS tax
transcripts submitted after the hearing reflected that he owed about $15,500 in past-due taxes for
those years.  The transcripts reflected installment agreements for those years were established in late
2012 and early 2013, but ended in April 2013.  In August 2013, the IRS issued Applicant two
Notices of Intent to Levy.  No documentation was provided to show these tax debts were paid.  His
2014 IRS tax transcript submitted after the hearing also reflected that he still owed almost $3,000
in past-due taxes for that year. The IRS sent him an inquiry about the non-filing of his 2014 income
tax return in November 2015 and he did not file that tax return until May 2016.  He provided no
documentation showing his 2014 Federal tax debt was paid.     
Applicant testified that he filed his 2013 Federal income tax return on time.  A copy of an 
IRS transcript submitted after the hearing reflected that, as of May 8, 2017, he had not filed a tax
return for that year.  In 2014, the IRS sent him an inquiry about the non-filing of that tax return.  He
testified he thought his tax consultant filed it.  
In late 2013 or early 2014, Applicant contacted the tax consultant to help him with his tax
issues that are attributed to other tax preparers.  The tax consultant testified at his hearing.  The tax
consultant confirmed with the IRS that Applicant owed about $22,000 in Federal taxes for 2007-
2
2009 and learned he had not filed his Federal income tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012.  He
thought his previous tax preparer completed those tax returns.  The tax consultant filed them for him. 
She also learned he owed Federal income taxes for 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2014 and noted there were
filing errors in the tax returns made by the previous tax preparer.  When the tax consultant first
started working for Applicant, she discussed with him that he owed taxes for multiple years.  She
noted that Applicant previously had a payment plan with the IRS that ended when his 2013 income
tax return was not received by its due date.  The tax consultant testified that Applicant’s 2013
Federal income tax return was filed on time, but was not received by the IRS.  She resubmitted it. 
Although the record of the proceeding was left open, no document was submitted to confirm that
his 2013 Federal income tax was filed.  In April 2018, a new IRS installment plan for the past-due
taxes was initiated with monthly payments of $400.  It will be implemented until Applicant receives
a response to an offer of compromise.  The tax consultant estimated Applicant owes the IRS about
$43,000.   
In completing a security clearance application (SCA) in June 2016, Applicant responded
“No” to the question that asked if, in the past seven years, he failed to file or pay Federal, state, or
other taxes as required by law.  During a background interview in 2016, Applicant also responded
“No” to questions asking whether he had tax delinquencies.  At the hearing, Applicant testified that
he believed he had met his tax filing and paying requirements and his tax preparer has proof to
substantiate his claim.  However, no corroborating evidence was provided.  He denied that he
deliberately failed to disclose information.  
 
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant did not provide documentary proof that he filed his 2013 Federal income tax return
or that he paid or is paying his past-due taxes.  While his tax consultant is working with the IRS to
resolve his tax problems, he provided no documents that indicate a resolution has been negotiated.
Government exhibits show installment payments were made over the years, but they are not
sufficient to show he is adhering to good-faith efforts to pay his debts.  
Applicant deliberately omitted information about his tax problems on his 2016 SCA.  He also
deliberately provided false information during his background investigation.  Although he may have
been unaware of the Federal tax lien that was filed against him in 2011, he was aware he owed
Federal taxes for the years included in that lien, i.e., 2007-2009.  He discussed with a coworker his
tax issues after returning from overseas in 2007.  He hired the tax consultant in late 2013 or early
2014 to address his tax problems.  
Discussion
Applicant contends the Judge was biased against him and his attorney.  There is a rebuttable
presumption that a judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking to overcome that
presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 2-4 (App. Bd.
Aug 7, 2018). There are three aspects to Applicant’s claim of bias.  The first aspect involves
Applicant’s claim that the Judge showed bias “by threatening to disallow testimony of a material
3
witness if [Applicant’s] representative did not call the witness in the specific order she wanted.” 
Appeal Brief at 14.  At the hearing, Applicant’s Counsel intended to call the tax consultant as a
witness before Applicant testified, and the following exchange occurred:
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  . . . At this time, with your permission, I’d like to call [the
tax consultant], who is on telephone standby.
[Judge]:  No.  I think I want to hear -- this will not help me put things in context.  I
think we need to hear from the Applicant first.  Otherwise I’m not going to
understand the testimony.  She is a tax preparer?
  [Applicant’s Counsel]: Yeah.  I have this case prepared to call witnesses in a certain
sequence.
[Judge]:  Okay.  But I would like to hear from the Applicant first because I’m not
going to understand what she has to say until I hear what he says unless she then is
on standby to be recalled.  And that’s what I intend to do, is you can recall her after
him or you can call her now or whatever.
But there is going to be a lot of questions I may have for her after I hear him
testify.
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  Okay.
[Judge]:  So if you want to call her twice and recall her, that’s fine.  But if she, based
on your proffer that she’s a tax preparer, then it makes sense to me that I need to
know what his testimony is before we ask her questions.
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  Okay.  I just have the case organized a different way, so I
will make --
[Judge]:  Well, I’ll give you time [-] reorganize it then because unless I know what
he has to say, I don’t know what the context of her testimony is going to be.
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  I’m going to ask her if she’s available for two times around
the block, so.
[Judge]:  Okay.  If that’s  -- but I’m not going to have her after he testifies, because
my guess is there will be additional questions.  
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  I understand.  Thank you very much. 
[Judge]:  And if she’s not available, then I’m not going to accept any of her
testimony, so it’s either all or nothing.
4
*   *   *
(Telephone call placed, not answered by party.)
[Judge]:  Okay.  Let’s go ahead and have your client testify.
[Applicant’s Counsel]: I’d like to call these two character witnesses so they can be
released.
[Judge]:  And they’re strictly character?
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  They’re strictly character.
[Judge]:  Okay.1
First, contrary to Applicant’s assertions, the Judge did not threaten “to disallow testimony of a
material witness if [Applicant’s] representative did not call the witness in the specific order she
wanted.”  The Judge essentially indicated that she would not accept any of the tax consultant’s
testimony unless she was subject to questioning after Applicant testified.  Second, a judge is
responsible for ruling on questions of procedure and evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.10.  Such rulings
are subject to review on appeal to determine whether any harmful error occurred.  Third, this issue
became a moot point because the tax consultant, who was not available when originally called to
testify, later testified after Applicant had done so.  This incident does not establish that the Judge
was biased. 
The second aspect of the bias claim involves an exchange between Applicant’s Counsel and
the Judge at the beginning of the tax consultant’s testimony.  The record reflects the following
exchange:
[Applicant’s Counsel]:  All right.  What is your occupation?
[Judge]:  Okay.  Excuse me one second.  I don’t want you up here.  You can stay
over there.  Right there.  I don’t care if the phone is here, but I don’t want you
looking over the bench.  It’s inappropriate.  
[Applicant’s Counsel]: Okay.2
A judge “shall conduct all proceedings in a fair, timely, and orderly manner.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.10. 
Within the confines of those requirements, a judge has latitude to decide the manner in which a
1 Tr. at 22-24.
2 Tr. at 166.
5
hearing is conducted.  We do not find merit in Applicant’s arguments that this exchange reflects that
the Judge acted in a demeaning and inappropriate manner.  The Judge acted within her authority to
determine how close Applicant’s Counsel could approach the bench during the questioning of a
witness.
The third aspect of the bias claim involves Applicant’s description of the Judge’s behavior
as “combative and argumentative” and as “creating a chaotic and confusing environment” that
impacted his testimony.  Appeal Brief at 5.  In support of this argument, he cites to various pages
in the transcript but does not identify the specific conduct that he is challenging.  From our review,
the cited pages in the transcript, and the record as a whole, do not establish bias, i.e., partiality for
or against a party, predisposition to decide a case or issue without regard to the merits, or other
indicia of lack of impartiality.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03162 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2017). 
The presumption that a judge is impartial and unbiased is not rebutted by the mere showing of a
judge’s adverse rulings (Bixler v. Foster, 596 F.3d 751, 762 (10th Cir. 2010)); “expressions of
impatience, dissatisfaction, annoyance, and even anger” (Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 540, 555-
556 (1994)); “stern and short-tempered . . . efforts at courtroom administration” (Id.); harsh
comments (ISCR Case No. 09-07395 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 14, 2010)); or extensive and sharp
questioning of an applicant or witnesses (ISCR Case No. 12-09545 at 3(App. Bd. Dec 21, 2015)). 
In this case, Applicant has not shown how the Judge’s conduct may have adversely impacted his
testimony.  It appears the Judge’s questioning of Applicant was done to clarify his testimony.  The
record does not support Applicant’s contention that the Judge created “a chaotic and confusing
environment.”  We find nothing in the record to persuade a reasonable person that the Judge lacked
impartiality.  Applicant has failed to met his heavy burden of persuasion to establish bias.     
Applicant argues that all of his tax returns have been filed and all of his taxes have been paid. 
Appeal Brief at 3 and 6-7.  As the Board has previously noted, it is reasonable for a Judge to expect
applicants to present documentation showing the resolution of their financial problems.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s
conclusions that Applicant failed to present documentary evidence establishing that he filed his 2013
Federal income tax return and is paying his past-due taxes.  
   
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not consider or properly weigh all relevant evidence
and did not properly apply mitigating conditions.  In support of these claims, he argues that he hired
a tax consultant to assist him in resolving his tax problems, established a tax repayment plan, and
was unaware of his tax problems when he submitted his SCA or underwent his background
interview.  The Judge, however, made findings of fact about those matters.  Applicant’s arguments
are neither sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record nor enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec 7, 2017).  We
give due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant cited, but it is neither binding
precedent on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
6
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
7
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
8
