 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-03771 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 29, 2016. On 
November 14, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. He denied all the allegations in the SOR. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 21, 2018. On the same day, a 
 
2 
 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on June 13, 2018, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit A.1 The case was assigned to me on September 6, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old senior program manager employed by a defense 
contractor since November 2016. He served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Air Force 
from June 1997 to May 2007. He has served in the U.S. Air Force Reserve from 
September 2013 to the present. He was self-employed from May 2007 to April 2011. He 
has been employed by defense contractors since April 2011, except for a five-month 
period from June to November 2012, when he worked in the private sector. He has held 
a security clearance while on active duty and as an employee of defense contractors. He 
married in January 2001. He and his wife have two children, ages 16 and 15.  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts that are reflected in credit reports from May 
2018 (FORM Item 4), October 2017 (FORM Item 5), and June 2016 (FORM Item 6). The 
evidence concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.g: delinquent student loans placed for collection of 
$6,235; $4,166; $4,080; $2,504 (two loans for same amount); and $2,360. Applicant 
attended college courses from June 2012 to July 2015. In March 2017, he told a security 
investigator that these loans should be in a deferred status because he is still a student, 
even though he has not attended any classes since July 2015 due to his busy schedule. 
(FORM Item 7 at 6, 10.) The credit reports from October 2017 and May 2018 reflect that 
these loans are delinquent and referred for collection. (FORM Item 4 at 2-4; FORM Item 
5 at 1-2.) In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that he was “currently in 
negotiation” for a payment plan. (AX A.) He submitted no documentary evidence of 
negotiations, payments, or a payment plan. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: delinquent car loan charged off for $3,868. Applicant was unable to 
provide any information about this debt when he was interviewed by a security 
                                                          
1 The FORM included a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on March 20, 2017. The 
PSI summary was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed 
Applicant that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, 
additions, deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI summary on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Applicant submitted a detailed response to the FORM but did not comment on the accuracy 
or completeness of the PSI summary, nor did he object to it. I conclude that he waived any objections to 
the PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to 
take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). See ADP Case No. 17-03252 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2018) (holding that it was 
reasonable for the administrative judge to conclude that any objection had been waived by an applicant’s 
failure to object after being notified of the right to object). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 3) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
investigator. (FORM Item 4 at 13.) The credit report from October 2017 reflects that this 
debt was charged off in December 2010. (FORM Item 5 at 2.) It is not reflected in the May 
2018 credit report. (FORM Item 4.) Based on the date when the debt was charged off, it 
would have “aged off” any credit reports after December 2017.3 There is no evidence that 
the debt was paid or otherwise resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: delinquent medical bill for $208. In his SCA, Applicant stated that 
he was in the process of disputing several medical bills, and that if the disputes were not 
resolved within 30 days, he would pay them so that they would be removed from his credit 
record. (FORM Item 3 at 35.) The credit report from May 2018 reflected that this debt was 
paid in August 2017. (FORM Item 4 at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i-1.l: state tax liens for $7,309; $536; $3,258; and $4,621. In his SCA, 
Applicant stated that these liens were for payroll taxes incurred while he was self-
employed, and that the taxes were being paid under a payment plan that would be 
completed in March 2017. (FORM Item 3 at 33-34.) When he was interviewed by a 
security investigator in March 2017, he told the investigator that he did not pay the taxes 
for tax year 2010 because he could not afford them at the time, that he was making 
monthly $200 payments, and that he anticipated paying this debt in full by September 
2017. (FORM Item 7 at 9.) The security investigator who conducted the interview 
specifically commented, “Subject was given the opportunity to provide additional 
documentation regarding financial delinquencies. Subject failed to provide documentation 
during the interview, or subsequent to the interview to corroborate his disagreement with 
accounts on the credit bureau report.” (FORM Item 7 at 17.) In Applicant’s response to 
the FORM, he stated that he was still in a payment plan for the delinquent taxes, indicating 
that he had not completed the payment plan in March 2017, as he promised in his SCA, 
or in September 2017, as he promised during his security interview. (AX A.) He submitted 
no documentary evidence of efforts to resolve the tax debt. The liens are not reflected in 
the May 2018 and October 2017 credit reports. (FORM Items 4 and 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged-
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of 
limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 15 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
  
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant denied all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. However, the 
documentary evidence in the FORM establishes the following potentially disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to . . . pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. The apparent failure of Applicant’s attempt at 
self-employment was a condition beyond his control. Although the taxes were due for tax 
year 2010, the record does not reflect when he first contacted the tax authorities about 
resolving the debt or took any other responsible measures to resolve it. He has not 
attributed any of the other debts alleged in the SOR to conditions beyond his control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling, and his financial situation is not yet under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant has 
submitted no evidence of payments or a payment plan for the student loans or the 
charged-off auto loan. The fact that the auto loan has dropped of his credit reports “is not 
meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 7, 
2016). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant expressed doubts about the 
validity of the medical debts reflected in his credit reports when he submitted his SCA, he 
has not disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(g) is not established. Applicant has submitted no documentary evidence 
of payments or a payment plan for his state taxes. When applicants claim to have resolved 
a delinquent debt, they are expected to submit documentary evidence to support the 
claim. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). The absence of the 
tax liens on recent credit reports does not necessarily reflect that the taxes have been 
paid. To the contrary, Applicant stated in his response to the FORM that he is still making 
payments on the tax debt. Furthermore, payment of delinquent taxes does not end the 
 
7 
 
inquiry. A security clearance adjudication is not aimed at insuring an applicant’s 
compliance with the tax laws. Even if Applicant is on his way to resolving his tax problem, 
his efforts do not preclude careful consideration of his security worthiness based on his 
prior behavior evidencing irresponsibility. ISCR Case No. 12-05053 (App. Bd. Oct.30, 
2014). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. Applicant has a long record of military and civilian service in 
responsible and sensitive positions. However, his response to security concerns raised 
by his delinquent debts has been long on promises and short on documentary evidence. 
The security investigator commented on Applicant’s failure to provide documentary 
evidence in the interview summary. Department Counsel specifically commented on the 
lack of documentary evidence in her submission of the case, but Applicant did not avail 
himself of the opportunity to provide such evidence when he responded to the FORM.  
 
Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR 
Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts and failure to pay taxes. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
