 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03363 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2000 through 
2006. He presented no evidence of efforts to pay his delinquent state and federal taxes. 
He has a history of financial problems and his evidence is insufficient to establish a 
track record of financial responsibility. He failed to demonstrate good judgment, 
reliability, and ability to comply with the law. He has a problem complying with well-
established government rules. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 9, 2016, 
seeking the continuation of his clearance eligibility required for his position with a 
federal contractor. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
on October 26, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on November 6, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 13, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on June 1, 2018, setting the hearing for June 20, 2018. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. At the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). 
Applicant testified and submitted eight exhibits (AE 1 through 8). AE 8 was received 
post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a through 1.h), and submitted 
documents in mitigation. His SOR admissions, and those at the hearing, are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old transportation specialist working for a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1981. He married in 1992 and divorced in 
2005. He has two children, ages 36 and 17. Applicant started working for federal 
contractors in the early 1990s. He received eligibility for a secret clearance in 1996, 
which has been continued to present. He has been employed by the same federal 
contractor since 2003, initially as a mail clerk, and since 2012 as a transportation 
specialist. 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2016 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed financial problems, which included: his failure to timely file his federal and 
state tax returns for tax years 2000 through 2006, delinquent federal taxes, wage 
garnishments, and liens filed against his property by the IRS.  
 
The background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the 
two Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings and discharged debts in both 1997 and 2006. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b) It also established that: Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2000 through 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c); his state entered liens 
against him in 2010 for $7,994 and 2008 for $1,496 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e); the IRS 
entered liens against him in 2007 for $14,774 and 2006 for $8,613 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g); 
and he owed a medical debt for $312 (SOR ¶ 1.h).  
 
Concerning his 1997 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, Applicant stated that his wife lost her 
job and they could not afford the mortgage payments. He was behind on his mortgage 
payments and other debts and filed for bankruptcy. Concerning his 2006 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, Applicant testified that he got swindled by his lawyer. He had not filed his 
income tax returns for a number of years and acquired a large tax debt to the IRS. He 
claimed his lawyer advised him to file for bankruptcy to release his tax obligation. 
However, tax debts are not dischargeable through bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant claimed he filed his delinquent income tax returns for tax years 2000 
through 2006 sometime after 2007. Applicant claimed that he retained an accountant to 
help him file his 2000 - 2006 delinquent federal income tax returns. He had to file his 
 
3 
 
 
delinquent federal income tax returns before the IRS would start any negotiations with 
him. He failed to provide documentary evidence to show he filed his 2000 – 2006 tax 
returns. 
 
Applicant’s take home pay is about $1,200 every two weeks. He is paid $28.30 
an hour. He has about $2,000 in a savings account and $50,000 in a retirement 
account. He has worked a part-time job as a security guard from 2010 to present, and 
makes about $365 every two weeks. (Tr. 27) Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h in November 2017. (AE 5) 
 
Applicant pays $425 in child support to his daughter. He testified that he provides 
another $300 extra a month to help his daughter. She is suffering from cancer (in 
remission) and required four different operations between 2012 and 2015. His ex-wife 
has custody of the daughter. Applicant’s or his ex-wife’s medical insurance paid for 
most of his daughter’s operations and other medical treatment.  
 
Applicant explained he failed to timely file his 2000 through 2006 income tax 
returns because he was having marital issues. He and his wife separated around 2000 
and divorced in 2005. During this period, he was “in a real messed up state of mind at 
that point and filing his taxes was the last thing on his mind.”  
 
Applicant submitted certificates of release of federal tax liens for tax years 2000 
($8,613); 2001 ($3,090); 2002 ($1,478); 2003 ($1,978); 2004 ($4,810); 2005 ($3,415); 
and 2006 ($3,305). Applicant testified that the statute of limitations to collect the taxes 
has run. He never tried to establish a payment arrangement with the IRS or his state. 
(Tr. 44) He presented no evidence of any payments made. Applicant claimed that the 
release of the liens should be sufficient evidence to show that he filed the income tax 
returns for tax years 2000 - 2006. I disagree. The IRS could have filed substitute tax 
returns for Applicant for those tax years when he failed to do so.  
 
I note that Applicant testified that he could not find his W-2 forms for tax years 
2005 and 2007 to file or refile his state income tax returns. He averred he was in the 
process of requesting his W-2 forms from the Social Security Administration to dispute 
his state tax assessments. Apparently, because he did not file his income tax returns, 
the state assessed him at the highest tax bracket and he wants to dispute the 
assessments before establishing negotiations with his state tax authorities to pay his 
back taxes. (Tr. 19, 38-40) Applicant testified that he has timely filed his federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2017. He also averred that he has 
paid any taxes due for those tax years. 
 
Applicant presented no evidence of any payment agreements or payments made 
to the IRS or his state to pay his delinquent taxes. The state garnished Applicant’s pay 
and his income tax refunds to collect past-due taxes. (AE 6 and 7) Around 2014, 
Applicant requested the assistance of the Tax Defense Network to help him resolve his 
tax problems. With their assistance, the IRS placed him in a non-collectible status. 
When asked why he never made any payments on his delinquent taxes, Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
testified that he did not have an answer. (Tr. 49) He knew he had to take care this issue, 
and he just did not. (Tr. 51) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended. The case will be adjudicated under the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative 
decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
 
5 
 
 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He filed for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection and his dischargeable debts were discharged in both 
1997 and 2006. He failed to timely file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2000 
through 2006. There is no documentary evidence to show he ever filed those income 
tax returns. Apparently, the IRS filed substitute tax returns for him. Applicant’s state tax 
authorities entered tax liens against him in 2010 ($7,994) and 2008 ($1,496). They are 
garnishing his pay and his tax refunds to collect the delinquent taxes. The IRS entered 
tax liens against Applicant in 2006 ($8,613) and 2007 ($18,079). The IRS released the 
federal tax liens after the expiration of the stature of limitations in November 2017. 
Applicant’s evidence failed to establish that he ever filed his delinquent income tax 
returns or that he made any good faith efforts to pay his delinquent state and federal 
taxes.   
 
AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.” The record established the disqualifying condition, requiring additional inquiry 
about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Six mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the mitigating conditions 
are sufficiently raised by the evidence and are not applicable in this case. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply because Applicant failed to file his taxes for seven consecutive years. 
Thus, his behavior was frequent.  
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant failed to file income tax returns for seven years because he was going 
through a difficult marital period that culminated in his divorce. Giving due consideration 
to Applicant’s difficult and challenging life events, I find that he failed to demonstrate 
financial responsibility under the circumstances. He failed to provide convincing 
evidence of efforts to file his federal and state income tax returns. Moreover, he made 
no effort to pay his delinquent state and federal taxes since he accrued them. Although 
the federal liens have been released, the evidence shows he owed $26,692 in past-due 
taxes and he presented no evidence of any efforts to pay his delinquent taxes. Applicant 
presented no reasonable explanation for his failure to make any efforts to pay his past-
due taxes. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that his failure to timely file his federal and state income 
tax returns resulted primarily from his lack of diligence. He neglected his legal obligation 
to timely file his income tax returns over an extended period. “Failure to comply with 
federal and state tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding to well-
established Government rules and regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and 
regulations is essential for protecting classified information.” ISCR Case No. 14-04437 
at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). This is true even if the returns have been filed. See ISCR 
Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
 Applicant’s repeated failure to file his federal and state income tax returns in a 
timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information. See, ISCR Case No. 14-
01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 27, 2016). In sum, Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
responsibility. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant, 55, has been employed with federal contractors since the mid-1990s, 
and has held a clearance since 1996. Because of his over 20 years holding a clearance 
and work for federal contractors, Applicant was aware he was required to maintain his 
financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. He failed to demonstrate good 
judgment and reliability. His failure to timely file his tax returns shows that he has a 
problem complying with well-established government rules. His evidence is insufficient 
to establish a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
