 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03780 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey DeAngelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Fleisher, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BENSON, Pamela C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to live within his means and has filed for bankruptcy on more 
than one occasion. His most recent bankruptcy was dismissed and he is responsible for 
approximately $75,000 of debt with his unsecured creditors. Those debts have not been 
addressed or resolved. Applicant has purchased three new cars within the last three 
years after the bankruptcy was dismissed. Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.   
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 9, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On December 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
  
 On January 12, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. He admitted all of the SOR allegations, and he 
submitted documentation. On February 14, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On 
April 12, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
the video teleconference hearing, setting the hearing for May 8, 2018.  
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s counsel 
offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through E, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant and one character witness testified at the hearing. I held the record 
open until June 8, 2018, in the event either party wanted to submit additional 
documentation. Applicant’s counsel timely submitted AE F, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2018, 
and the record closed on June 8, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Having thoroughly considered the evidence in the record, including Applicant's 
admissions, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 59 years old. He has been employed as a subject matter expert in 
the internet technology (IT) field for a DOD contractor since April 2016. He has taken 
some college courses, and he has earned professional certifications, but he does not 
have a college degree. He and his wife were married for 36 years, until they divorced in 
2017. He has two adult children, ages 33 and 36. Applicant is required to pay his 
spouse monthly alimony in the amount of $2,600. He does not currently possess a DOD 
security clearance. (Tr. 43-45, 47, 49, 78-79; GE 1)  
 
Applicant testified that his financial problems started in approximately 2003 after 
his spouse lost her job. She eventually found some part-time work, but her income was 
minimal. In 2008, both Applicant and his spouse lost their jobs. Applicant was making 
approximately $97,000 annually at the time. He was unemployed for a few months, and 
then he found employment making approximately $65,000 a year. After working for 
about six months with this employer, Applicant was hired to work on an air force base 
making approximately $77,000 a year. Applicant and his spouse’s loss of employment, 
and periods of under-employment, had a negative impact on their finances. (Tr. 49-51; 
GE 1) 
 
Applicant had previously worked for City 1 for about two years assisting the city 
with their computer systems. In about 2009, Applicant was notified that he owed 
approximately $14,0001 for unpaid city taxes. Applicant’s finances quickly spiraled 
downward after he received this notice. Applicant consulted with an attorney and was 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s city income tax debt was listed in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy as $11,757.61. GE 3 
 
3 
 
 
told that the estimated legal fees to dispute the city tax issue would most likely be as 
much, if not more, than the current unpaid city taxes. Applicant stated that he did not 
want his wages garnished to pay for the city taxes, so he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
2010, as his attorney advised. Applicant’s bankruptcy liabilities totaled $305,499.99. (Tr. 
51- 55, GE 3)  
 
Beginning in August 2010, Applicant was ordered to pay $2,893 monthly to the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee. In May 2012, the monthly amount was lowered to 
$2,310. In March 2014, the debtors requested the monthly payment to be modified to 
$998, as they had surrendered their home to the mortgage holder. The court confirmed 
the modified monthly payment in April 2014. Applicant had his paycheck automatically 
deducted to pay the Chapter 13 bankruptcy trustee. (GE 3) 
 
During the course of the bankruptcy, Applicant had employment with different 
contractors. One of the Federal contractors informed Applicant that they did not know 
how to deduct the Chapter 13 payments from his paycheck. In March 2015, the trustee 
notified the court that Applicant made his last payment in January 2015, and filed a 
motion to dismiss for failure to make payments. Applicant’s attorney, Applicant and his 
spouse were served a copy of the motion. Applicant admitted receiving a copy of this 
motion, and he failed to take action. In April 2015, Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case was dismissed for failure to make payments. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The trustee’s final report 
showed that a total of $117,550.73 had been disbursed to Applicant’s bankruptcy 
creditors, to include payment in full for the city tax debt. (Tr. 57; GE 3) 
 
Applicant listed in his 2016 SCA that he was “discharged from all debts” that he 
claimed in the 2010 bankruptcy. At the hearing, Applicant testified that was an error on 
his part. In his SOR response, he confirmed that he that had received notice from the 
court that he was still liable for any outstanding accounts since his bankruptcy case had 
been dismissed. He testified that he still owed about $75,000 for his outstanding 
unsecured consumer credit card debt. After his bankruptcy was dismissed in April 2015, 
Applicant purchased a 2015 car for his spouse that same month. His ex-wife is now 
responsible for paying the monthly car payments from her alimony. In 2016, Applicant 
purchased a new car for himself. He then traded in that vehicle for a 2017 vehicle the 
following year. (Tr. 56-58; 85-90, 104; GE 1, 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002. In 2002, 
Applicant received a notice from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the state for 
unpaid taxes in the total approximate amount of $45,000. His attorney advised Applicant 
to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy as a way to structure manageable tax payments. 
Applicant fulfilled his Chapter 13 bankruptcy obligations and his case was discharged in 
2006. During the hearing, Applicant admitted that he had also filed for bankruptcy in 
1991. The 1991 bankruptcy was not alleged in the SOR, but was presented by 
Government counsel for limited consideration. Applicant’s Department of Energy 
security clearance was revoked in about 1991, which caused him to lose his job. This 
event is what led him, in part, to file for bankruptcy in 1991. Due to this security 
clearance revocation, Applicant admitted that he is fully aware that finances is one of 
 
4 
 
 
several factors that come under scrutiny when an individual is being considered for a 
government security clearance. (Tr. 83-84; GE 4; AE C, D) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted on a home mortgage loan in the full 
amount of $228,656, of which $57,098 was delinquent. The home was in foreclosure 
status. (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant admitted that during his 2010 bankruptcy, his mortgage 
interest rate dropped to 5.9% from the previous 9.9%. He contacted the mortgage 
holder and asked if the 5.9% interest rate would be maintained after the bankruptcy was 
complete. He was told that the mortgage interest rate would revert back to the 9.9%. 
Applicant then decided to surrender his house to the mortgage holder. Applicant 
testified that he recently spoke with the mortgage creditor and confirmed that he does 
not owe any money after the foreclosure of his home. His May 2018 credit report also 
showed a zero balance on this account. Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C for tax 
year 2017 disclosing the amount of debt discharged by the mortgage holder was 
$173,531. Applicant’s potential tax consequences from the Form 1099-C is unknown. 
(Tr. 58- 67; AE B, F)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant is indebted to a collection agency for a cellular 
account in the amount of $651. Applicant stated that he had been disputing this 
account, however, he settled the account for less than full value. He attached a 
statement from the creditor with his SOR response. This account was resolved after the 
receipt of the SOR. (Tr. 76-77)   
 
The last three accounts under Guideline F, (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f. and 1.g), allege that 
Applicant owes a combined total of $694 for unpaid medical service accounts that were 
referred for collection. Applicant stated that one account was reflected as delinquent 
despite that he was making regular payments on the account, another account’s billing 
statements had been mailed to the wrong address, and the last account became 
delinquent due to a medical insurance payment issue, which has now been resolved. 
Applicant attached documentation with his SOR response showing that all three medical 
collection accounts have been paid in full. (Tr. 77-78)  
 
 Applicant stated that his financial issues were the result of the 2008 recession, 
loss of employment, and unexpected reductions in salary. He separated from his 
spouse in 2014. During that time he was also taking care of his father diagnosed in 
2006 with Alzheimer’s. His father passed away in 2015, and he and his wife divorced in 
2017. Applicant started financial counseling after meeting with his counsel, and he had 
attended two counseling sessions, with the most recent attendance the day before this 
hearing. Applicant formulated a monthly budget and keeps track of his financial 
obligations on a spreadsheet. He is currently living with his girlfriend in an apartment, 
and she is paying the majority of their living expenses. (Tr. 46-47, 49-51, 67-68, 70-72; 
74-75; AE E) 
      
A co-worker who met Applicant in a professional setting in early 2009, testified 
that he worked with Applicant for approximately four years. After the witness retired in 
2013, he has maintained a close, personal relationship with Applicant to the present 
 
5 
 
 
time. The witness was aware of his financial problems, to include tax problems which 
resulted in Applicant filing for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2002, and the city tax bill, which 
prompted Applicant to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2010. He has advised Applicant 
to live a more frugal lifestyle, such as packing lunch instead of buying lunch every day,2 
or putting money into his 401K. The witness entered into a business arrangement with 
Applicant, and stated that Applicant has never missed a contract payment since 2014. 
He would have no qualms about Applicant holding a DOD secret security clearance with 
one condition, as long as a metric could be put in place to monitor Applicant’s 
compliance and ensure he is fiscally responsible. (Tr.  24-28, 32, 41-42; AE A,) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 an “applicant is responsible 
for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal financial statement (AE E) reflected $200 set aside monthly for lunches. His car 
payment is $844.43 per month, and he has $300 per month for “miscellaneous.” After paying his 
expenses, Applicant has a monthly net remainder of $152.90.  
 
6 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 The financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual 
might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information.   
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
 
 Applicant has filed for bankruptcy on multiple occasions. He filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2010, but this case was dismissed in April 2015 for his failure to make 
regular payments to the bankruptcy trustee. The unresolved accounts in the dismissed 
bankruptcy total approximately $75,000, for which he remains responsible. There is no 
evidence that Applicant has repaid or is in the process of resolving his accounts with the 
unsecured creditors. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,  was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant has a long history reflecting his inability to live within his means. Based 
on the documentary evidence offered by the Government, his unsecured creditors from 
the dismissed bankruptcy case in April 2015 remain largely unaddressed. The same 
month his Chapter 13 bankruptcy case was dismissed, Applicant purchased a brand 
new car for his spouse. The following year, he purchased a brand new car for himself. 
In 2017, he traded in that car for a 2017 vehicle. Applicant offered insufficient 
information regarding his efforts to avoid this recurring scenario of debt acquisition in 
the future. That, and the fact insufficient time has passed for him to demonstrate that he 
can live within his means moving forward, preclude application of AG ¶ 20(a). Moreover, 
since many of his monetary problems stem from poor financial decisions, Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
unfortunate financial predicament is not a circumstance solely beyond his control, AG ¶ 
20(b) does not fully apply. 
   
 Applicant has received financial counseling, but he also admitted attending only 
two sessions, with his last meeting occurring the day before his hearing. There is scarce 
information indicating whether his financial planning has improved or if his bankruptcy 
consumer debts are now being addressed. To his credit, he has resolved most of the 
debts alleged in the SOR, and paid his secured creditors listed in his most recent 
bankruptcy. It is clear from the evidence, however, that Applicant has not been able to 
curb his excessive spending, such as with his recent new car purchases. For a time, 
Applicant was addressing his delinquent debts through bankruptcy. However, that 
bankruptcy was dismissed, and significant unsecured debt remains unresolved. 
Applicant also surrendered his home to the mortgage holder for foreclosure, which is a 
lawful and legitimate method for addressing such financial distress. While both actions 
are lawful, they do not necessarily reflect good-faith efforts to address one’s debts. 
Consequently, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not fully apply.  
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) was 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant failed to live within his means and has filed for bankruptcy on more 
than one occasion. His most recent bankruptcy was dismissed and he is responsible for 
approximately $75,000 of debt with his unsecured creditors. Those debts have not been 
 
9 
 
 
addressed or resolved. Applicant has purchased three new cars within the last three 
years after the bankruptcy was dismissed.  
 
 Applicant has a history of living beyond his means. Until there are clear 
indications that Applicant has curbed his excessive spending behavior, there is a 
distinct possibility that his financial problems will recur. Overall, his financial actions do 
not show sufficient good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Because protection 
of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any unresolved 
doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified information.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                  
 
               
Pamela C. Benson 
Administrative Judge 
