 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-02663  
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
June 2017, but the petition is pending dismissal because he was unable to make the 
required payments. His debts remain largely outstanding and unresolved, and he has 
not established a reasonable plan for resolving them. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 22, 2013. 
On August 15, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the national security adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2018. On May 4, 2018, a notice of hearing 
was issued scheduling the hearing for June 5, 2018. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8. GE 2 through 7 were admitted without objection. Applicant objected to GE 1, 
his 2013 SCA, due to the document’s age, but I overruled the objection.1 Documents 
attached to Applicant’s Answer were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE 
F, and admitted without objection. Applicant submitted additional documents at his 
hearing, which were marked as AE G through AE I, and admitted without objection. 
Applicant also testified. I held the record open to allow Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documentation. He timely submitted exhibits AE J through AE L, which 
were admitted without objection.2 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 13, 2018. 
The record closed on July 6, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g with explanations and documents. 
His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He has a general equivalency diploma (GED) and 
some certificates in information technology (IT). He married in 2000. He and his wife 
were separated from 2002 to about 2004. They reconciled, and bought a house 
together in 2006. They separated again about six years ago, in 2012. Applicant has 
three grown children: two with his wife (ages 27 and 28) and another child, age 21. (Tr. 
48-50, 92-94; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant was employed full time in IT and communications with a large defense 
contractor from November 2006 until he was laid off at the end of June 2014 when his 
employer lost the contract that employed him. He was then unemployed for about six 
months. His employment since then can best be described as sporadic. He has held 
numerous temporary or part-time jobs with defense or other government contractors. 
His work has either lasted only for a few weeks or months, and has been largely at half 
                                                          
1 Tr. 21-22.  
 
2 During the hearing, I described for the record several original certificates and awards Applicant brought 
with him. They were marked as AE J, but they were not placed into the record, as they were originals of 
personal significance to Applicant. (Tr. 43-45, 105-106) I have nonetheless considered them. After the 
hearing, Applicant submitted copies of some but not all of these documents, and they were admitted as 
AE J. AE K is a judicial order regarding a probate matter. AE L is a scheduling order regarding Applicant’s 
bankruptcy case.  
 
 
3 
 
 
time or less. (Tr. 50-53; 60-62; Answer) Applicant has a job offer from an employer for a 
full-time position at an annual salary of $62,400. The job requires a clearance. (AE I)3 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial woes to his layoff in June 2014. Due to his 
sporadic employment, he fell behind on his expenses, including his mortgage (SOR ¶ 
1.b) and other debts, some of which he incurred to make ends meet. (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.e). He testified that he intended to pay his bills, but, “I couldn’t pay what I didn’t have.” 
(Tr. 51, 61; Answer)  
 
 Applicant also attributed his debts to his martial separation, in 2012. (Tr. 88-89). 
He listed several debts on his October 2013 SCA, which he filled out several months 
before he was laid off. These included a credit card debt, a debt to a phone company, 
and debts related to his house, all debts listed in the SOR. On his SCA, he said several 
of the debts were incurred when his wife did not pay them. (GE 1) 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a home in October 2006. The first and second 
mortgages on the home are SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. Applicant said in his Answer and at 
hearing that his wife was responsible for the monthly payments on the second 
mortgage, but she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2014 and stopped making 
payments. Applicant asserted that he attempted to make payments on the second 
mortgage, but was not able to do so because the account was in bankruptcy. (Tr. 64-69, 
74-78, 91-92; Answer) The account was charged off, though no amount is alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.c. (GE 3; GE 4) Applicant provided a Form 1099-C, issued to him alone, from 
tax year 2015, in which the creditor canceled the debt, of $51,143. (AE C) Applicant did 
not pay taxes on any income he received as a result of that cancelled debt. (Tr. 76-77) 
Applicant claimed that his wife’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged, but did not 
provide corroborating documentation. (Tr. 97) 
 
 Applicant testified that when his wife filed bankruptcy, she “was trying to get 
disconnected from the house, and they took her off of it. She said she didn’t have any 
money, so everything fell on me.” (Tr. 71) Applicant and his wife have been separated 
for six years, since about 2012. He remains living in the house they bought together. 
The primary mortgage account is $30,742 past due, with a total balance due on the loan 
of about $279,000. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant was unable to recall at hearing when the 
account became past due. (Tr. 72-74) Credit reports reflect that no payments have been 
made on SOR ¶ 1.b since April 2013. (GE 3; GE 4) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 2017, to keep the home out of 
foreclosure. (SOR ¶ 1.a) He testified that he attempted to make mortgage payments 
before then but the creditor would not accept them. He testified that they accepted 
payments only after he filed bankruptcy. (Tr. 70) 
 
Applicant stated in his Answer that he had made arrangements with the 
mortgage creditor to pay them $2,078 for his mortgage and $300 in arrears, each 
                                                          
3 Applicant was also sponsored for a clearance by another employer at the time of the hearing. (Tr. 14-16) 
 
4 
 
 
month. For a time, his brother was renting a room in the house, and may have been 
contributing financially. (Tr. 66-68; Answer) Applicant also testified that he had not made 
payments on the primary mortgage for four or five months, due to insufficient income. 
(Tr. 59-60) 
 
 Applicant filed for bankruptcy as a sole debtor. He listed $319,000 in real estate 
assets. He also listed a potential $200,000 inheritance from a distant family member. He 
listed about $370,000 in liabilities. The mortgage (about $343,000) was the largest debt. 
Applicant listed himself as the sole debtor for the account, but noted that the property 
was jointly owed, with his “ex-wife.” (Tr. 91-92; GE 2, Schedule D) Applicant went 
through credit counseling during the bankruptcy process, as required. (GE 2) 
 
 The mortgage is listed in Applicant’s bankruptcy petition, though with a different 
creditor than on his credit reports or in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 58-59; GE 2; GE 3, GE 4, GE 5) 
Two debts to a credit union are also listed. These include a $20,227 credit card debt. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d) and a home equity account, for $535. (SOR ¶ 1.e) (Tr. 60; GE 2) These 
debts remain unresolved.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a $162 past-due debt to a phone company. SOR ¶ 1.g is a $638 
past-due debt to a cable provider. Both of these debts have been paid. (AE E; AE F) 
 
 Applicant listed two possible inheritances in his bankruptcy petition. The first 
concerns the estate of a lifelong friend. The second concerns the estate of a cousin in 
another state. Applicant testified that he expects to be the sole beneficiary of the friend’s 
estate. (GE 7 at Schedule A/B) 
 
The friend’s estate includes a bank account containing about $188,000. It also 
includes a vacant home currently designated as blighted. The property has been 
appraised and is listed for sale, though it must be cleaned and cleared of debris. (AE H) 
The decedent’s children sought to invalidate the will, alleging claims of undue influence, 
lack of capacity, and fraud by Applicant. These claims were dismissed by the probate 
court in June 2018 after a three-day evidentiary hearing. Applicant was appointed 
personal representative for the estate, pending his filing of a petition for probate within 
30 days. (Tr. 55-57, 81-86; AE B; AE G; AE K). The decedent’s will is not in evidence in 
this proceeding.  
 
 Applicant also noted in his bankruptcy petition that he expected to receive 
$200,000 from his cousin’s estate. (GE 2 at Schedule A/B) At hearing in this 
proceeding, he said he expected to receive between $70,000 and $75,000. The 
cousin’s estate remains in probate. (Tr. 57, 100-104) He provided no supporting 
documentation, and the cousin’s will is not in evidence in this proceeding.  
 
 In November 2017, Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan was 
confirmed. He was to pay $300 a month for 14 months, and then a minimum of $3,115 
for 46 months. He was also to provide sufficient inheritance proceeds to fund his 
payment plan. (GE 2; GE 7; AE A; AE D)  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant fell behind on his bankruptcy payments for lack of income. He also was 
unable to pay his monthly mortgage (estimated $2,000). (Tr. 54-55, 58, 80-81) In April 
2018, the bankruptcy trustee moved to dismiss Applicant’s petition as a result. (GE 8) 
Applicant requested more time because he was going to court on the probate matter in 
late May 2018. (Tr. 54-55; AE H) The bankruptcy matter was set for hearing on July 20, 
2018. (AE L)  
 
 Once he receives them, Applicant’s intention is to use the proceeds from the two 
estates to begin making payments towards his bankruptcy plan. Applicant has an 
attorney for the probate matter regarding his friend, and he acknowledged that he likely 
owes the attorney between $25,000 and $30,000. (Tr. 87) 
   
  Applicant worked at the Pentagon for 17 years, until he was laid off. He provided 
a letter from a former Secretary of Defense commending him for his work on the 
Pentagon rebuilding project after 9/11, a certificate from a former Commandant of the 
Marine Corps commending him for his renovation work, a certificate from the White 
House Communications Agency commending his work regarding a presidential visit to 
the Pentagon, and other commendations. (Tr. 42-45, 61; AE J) 
  
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”4 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
                                                          
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant incurred numerous unresolved delinquent debts in the last several 
years, due to his separation from his wife in 2012, a job loss in 2014, and sporadic, 
unstable employment in the years since then. He fell behind on his mortgage, incurred 
several other debts, and is now in Chapter 13 bankruptcy. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has been behind on his debts since before he submitted his SCA, in 
2013. He and his wife separated in 2012. He lost his job in June 2014, and he has not 
been fully employed since. These are conditions beyond his control, and the first prong 
of AG ¶ 20(b) therefore applies.  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 2017. His mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
and other debts, including SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e) are listed in the bankruptcy. The second 
mortgage on his marital home (SOR ¶ 1.c) was charged off. Applicant asserted that his 
wife was responsible for it but Applicant was issued a 1099-C Form, in his name alone, 
cancelling that debt, of about $51,000. The debt is no longer an active concern, but the 
origin of the debt is substantially similar to the others.  
 
 Applicant has not paid his mortgage in several months. His bankruptcy petition is 
pending dismissal because he has not paid agreed upon payments. Applicant’s stated 
plan is to use the proceeds he expects to receive from the two probate matters as 
bankruptcy payments. However, this plan is largely speculative and undocumented. 
Applicant provided no documents from his cousin’s probate matter to establish any 
proceeds that might eventually come to him. His cousin’s will is not in evidence. 
Applicant documented that he is the personal representative for his friend’s estate. The 
estate has $188,000 in a bank account, as well as a blighted piece of real property for 
sale. His friend’s will is not in evidence, so it is not clear what proceeds he might receive 
from that estate, either. Applicant has a pending job offer, but a clearance is required for 
the position.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s outstanding delinquencies are a “continuing course of conduct.”5 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to establish that the behavior which led to 
his financial problems happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not continue to cast doubt on 
his current judgment, trustworthiness and reliability. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s plan to restore his financial stability is contingent on his receipt of 
significant as-yet-unrealized proceeds from two estates, both still in probate. His plan is 
too speculative at this point to be considered reasonable. Even if Applicant had shown 
evidence of a realistic plan, he has not established enough of a track record of 
payments into the bankruptcy plan or otherwise to his creditors to warrant application of 
any of the mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply. Applicant’s debts are 
not under control, so AG ¶ 20(c) does not fully apply, even with some evidence of credit 
counseling. AG ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply, except as to Applicant’s two smallest debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g), which have been paid.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence that his significant financial delinquencies are being resolved or are under 
control. The financial security concern arising from Applicant’s significant delinquencies 
remains unresolved. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017). 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
