 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04191 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 22, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a review based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. (Answer.) The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge in April 2018, but was assigned to me on August 27, 2018. 
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 8, 
2018. The Government submitted six Items for the record. Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM with a packet of documentation, which was marked as AX A, and entered into 
the record without objection. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 38, is single and has no children. He graduated from college in 
2015, obtaining his undergraduate degree. Applicant completed a security clearance 
application on August 28, 2016. He has not held a security clearance in the past. (Item 3)  
He has worked for his current employer since September 2016. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has delinquent debt in the amount of 
approximately $18,500 for collection or charged-off accounts and two accounts past due 
in the total amount of $1,532. (Item 1) Applicant admitted the debts, and provided 
explanations. (Item 2) He noted that two accounts were on a payment plan. 
 
Applicant was gainfully employed from January 2002 to August 2015. His credit 
report reveals that he paid his accounts and bills as agreed. His job required him to 
commute a distance from his home and travel frequently. He learned in 2015, that his 
mother was diagnosed with stage four breast cancer. He needed to be close to home so 
that he could aid his mother while she was receiving treatments of chemotherapy and 
radiation. He left his good job and obtained one close to home. He acknowledged that it 
was a big reduction in pay, but he had to help his mother everyday with medication and 
obtaining groceries. He admits that the year he worked with that company, he paid the 
minimum on his credit bills, but eventually was unable to maintain them.  However, he 
has no new delinquent bills. This was the first time that he had not been financially stable. 
His mother died in November 2017. (AX A) 
 
Applicant started a better job in September 2016, which allows for overtime pay.  
He was overwhelmed with the interest and penalty fees, but as he told the investigator 
during his interview in 2017, his plan was to arrange for payment plans in 2018. He had 
several accounts that he already made frequent payments on which were non-SOR 
accounts. When he received his new employment in late 2016, he put two accounts in 
payment plans. (Attachments to Answer) 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provided documentation of payments and 
payment plans for the following SOR accounts: 1.k, for which he has made two monthly 
payments of $109.73; 1.i, for which he has made a monthly payment of $53.03; 1.n. paid 
in full - $368.36; 1.f in a payment plan with monthly payments of $78.01; 1.l in payment 
plan with monthly payment of $64.42. Applicant provided the terms of each plan and the 
payments that he has made. (AX A) 
 
As to the other SOR accounts, Applicant has contacted the creditors and they have 
responded with payment options. (SOR 1.a; 1.d; and 1.h). He included the documentation 
from each creditor. (AX A) 
 
Applicant also contacted the remaining creditors in SOR 1.b; 1.c; 1;e; 1.g; 1.j; 1.m; 
and 1.o and is waiting for  payment options and when he is able to start payments on the 
remaining accounts. (AX A)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant submitted his pay checks from his current employer showing his salary 
of about $40,000 annually and his 20 overtime hours per pay period. He is working as 
much as he can to continue his payment plans and start the remaining ones listed above. 
He has a savings account and contributes to a Roth retirement account. Applicant 
produced documentation that he is current on his car loan. (AX A) He submitted a letter 
of recommendation from his employer from 2002 to 2015, who praises his exemplary 
work habits and exceptional leadership skills. He is respected by peers and supervisors. 
He has many certifications. In addition, he received an award from his current employer 
and a performance evaluation of “exceeds standards.” 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
 
4 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are the result of a grave medical emergency for his mother, which 
resulted in her death in November 2017. He left a well-paying job in 2015, so that he could 
attend to her at her home. Before that time, his credit reports show that he paid his bills. 
He took a lower-paying job and eventually could not maintain his bills. He was candid with 
the investigator in 2017 that his plan was to begin payment plans for all his delinquent 
debts in 2018. He already had started two plans. He kept his promise and is current with 
his various payments. He has no new delinquent bills.  
 
Applicant has paid two accounts in full and has current payment plans for   several 
other accounts. The remaining account creditors have been notified and sent Applicant 
payment options. He clearly has a plan. He has a past record of financial responsibility. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is fully established and does not cast doubt on his trustworthiness His mother 
was gravely ill and died in November 2017.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is established. While Applicant’s mother’s illness and 
underemployment was a condition beyond his control, he acted responsibly to address 
the resulting debts from his lower pay. He provided documentation that he has a plan in 
place with current payments for many of the accounts. Two are paid in full. He is working 
overtime now to supplement his income. He acted responsibly given his mother’s 
condition and death. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. AG 20(d) is fully established. Applicant is 
adhering to good-faith efforts to pay each and every creditor. He produced  
documentation to support this allegation. He provided sufficient documentation to support 
the claim. Applicant  met his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the SOR.  
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
6 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his many years of employment with one company, character 
reference and award, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
Formal Findings 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a-o: For  Applicant 
 Conclusion 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
