1 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
            [REDACTED]  ) ISCR Case No. 17-00937 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Due to circumstances largely beyond his control, Applicant experienced financial 
difficulties. However, Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and has 
mitigated the potential financial security concern. Applicant has mitigated the foreign 
influence security concerns raised by his wife’s family members who are citizens and 
residents of Azerbaijan. Access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on December 1, 2015. 
On April 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on May 4, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 16, 2017, and 
the case was assigned to me on December 14, 2017. On February 13, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for March 6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
called one witness. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 15, 2018. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision is based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges three debts totaling $30,184, and that 
Applicant defaulted on his mortgage loan, which led to foreclosure, in April 2015. The 
SOR alleges under Guideline B, that Applicant’s in-laws, sister-in-law, and two brothers-
in-law are citizens and residents of Azerbaijan, Applicant’s wife is joint-owner of a house 
in Azerbaijan valued at $120,000, and that Applicant provides financial support to his 
wife’s family in Azerbaijan. Applicant denies the amount of the alleged balances of the 
three debts, but admits the underlying accounts and that he defaulted on his mortgage 
loan. Applicant admits the Guideline B allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old inspector currently employed by a federal contractor 
since November 2015. He has worked in the aerospace industry his entire career 
however this is his first application for a security clearance. He and his wife married in 
2003 and have a 13-year-old son and a 10-year-old daughter. Applicant properly 
disclosed his foreign contacts during her background investigation. (GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 67.)   
 
Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in 2005. He was employed by a 
large commercial airline that terminated him three days before his fifth anniversary with 
the airline, which prevented the vesting of 5,000 shares of stock worth approximately 
$500,000. He was unemployed from approximately May or June 2006 until November or 
December 2006. He was hired for a short-term contract that ended in approximately April 
2007, then was unemployed for approximately one month. He was also unemployed from 
March 2013 until September 2013, from November 2014 until January 2015, and during 
May and October 2015. In these periods of unemployment, he used his 401(k) savings to 
support himself and his family. Between February 2010 and October 2012, Applicant was 
underemployed earning approximately $60,000 a year, which was about half of his usual 
salary. (GX 1; Tr. 39-48; Tr. 56.) 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a home in 2004. In 2007, after two periods of 
unemployment, Applicant took a job in another state and moved his family there. For a 
period of time, Applicant paid the mortgage and other expenses for the house he 
3 
 
purchased and his regular living expenses for himself and his family in another state. He 
contacted a property management company that, after allegedly vetting potential renters, 
rented Applicant’s house. The renters did not timely pay the rent and ultimately broke the 
lease. Before vacating the premises, the renters threw a large party and substantially 
damaged the house, including many of the fixtures, and threw furniture and other property 
into the pool. Applicant and his wife spent their vacation and a substantial sum of money 
repairing the damage and replacing the fixtures. Applicant rented the house two additional 
times, with similar results. (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
Applicant’s wife grew up living in one house in Azerbaijan and was adamant in her 
desire to retain the house they bought in 2004 as her home in the United States and one 
day return to living there. Primarily because of this, Applicant tried to maintain the 
mortgage-loan payments despite being an absentee homeowner, for a period of 
approximately 10 years. During that time, Applicant listed the house for sale on several 
occasions, but was unsuccessful. In order to make the mortgage-loan payments, 
Applicant continued to deplete his 401(k) and worked a second job. He attempted to enter 
a mortgage-modification agreement with the mortgage-loan holder, but was required to 
first make six on-time consecutive monthly payments. After doing so, the mortgage-loan 
holder told Applicant that his paperwork was incomplete. When the mortgage-loan holder 
finally offered a mortgage-modification agreement to Applicant, the terms of the 
agreement added an additional $100,000 and 10 years to the original mortgage loan, and 
Applicant did not enter the agreement. Applicant and his attorney then secured a buyer 
for a short sale of the house, but the mortgage-loan holder would not agree to the sale. 
Ultimately, in April 2015, the house was foreclosed. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) Applicant has not been 
contacted by any entity attempting to collect a deficiency balance. Applicant checked the 
county records and saw that the house sold for greater than the balance due on 
Applicant’s loan. (GX 2; Tr. 40-53.) The September 2016 credit bureau report shows a $0 
balance due to this creditor and the account does not appear on the February 2017 credit 
bureau report. (GX 4; GX 5.) 
 
In 2012, while underemployed, Applicant’s car and motorcycle were repossessed. 
The balance due on the car at the time of repossession was $24,178 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) The 
balance due on the motorcycle at the time of repossession was $4,705 (SOR ¶ 1.b.) The 
car was sold at auction and Applicant paid the remaining debt of $1,292 in February 2018. 
(AX A.) Applicant received a letter from the original creditor for the motorcycle after it was 
repossessed, showing that the motorcycle had sold for more than Applicant owed on his 
loan at auction. Applicant has not been contacted by the creditor since that time and the 
debt does not appear on his March 2017 credit bureau report. (Tr. 46; Tr. 50; GX 5.) The 
$1,301 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was for an unpaid rental car balance. Despite the fact 
that this debt does not appear on the record credit bureau reports, Applicant paid this 
debt in full in February 2018. (AX A; Tr. 50.) 
 
Applicant recently received approximately $38,000 from a retirement account from 
a previous employer. He used the proceeds to resolve his SOR debts and to reestablish 
a savings account. Applicant has not incurred any delinquent debt since 2012, lives within 
4 
 
his means, and considers his financial circumstances to be stable. (Tr. 59-60; GX 4; GX 
5; GX 2.) He was straightforward and sincere during his testimony. 
  
 The Guideline B SOR allegations arise because Applicant’s wife’s parents and 
siblings are citizens and residents of Azerbaijan. Applicant’s wife’s family members are C 
Christians of Armenian descent. Because of their ethnicity and religion, Applicant’s wife’s 
family members are in a minority that is subject to discrimination. (Tr. 33.) In 1988, 
Nagorno-Karabakh, a majority Armenian oblast within Soviet Azerbaijan, sought to unite 
with Armenia. A full-scale war began in 1992 between the former Soviet republics of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan over control of Nagorno-Karabakh. Approximately 30,000 people 
died and a million people were displaced before a Russian-brokered cease-fire was 
instituted in 1994. The U.S. has had diplomatic relations with Azerbaijan since its 
independence in 1994. Around 700,000 ethnic Azeris were forced out of the region where 
a separatist Armenian government declared de facto independence, although the region 
is still part of Azerbaijan. Approximately 235,000 Armenian refugees fled to other parts of 
Azerbaijan. The conflict between Armenia, a predominantly Christian nation which has 
grown closer to Russia, and Azerbaijan a predominantly Muslim nation that has received 
strong backing from Turkey, complicates the politics of the region. Despite the ceasefire, 
the struggle for control over the territory remains volatile. The government of Azerbaijan 
restricted individuals’ rights to freedom of association, expression, and assembly.1 
According to the U.S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 
for 2011: Azerbajain: 
 
Some of the approximately 20,000 to 30,000 citizens of Armenian descent 
living in the country historically complained of discrimination in employment, 
housing, and the provision of social services. Citizens who were ethnic 
Armenians often concealed their ethnicity by legally changing the ethnic 
designation in their passports. 
  
None of Applicant’s wife’s family members in Azerbaijan served in the military or 
worked for the government. Applicant’s wife, a U.S. resident since 2003 and citizen since 
2009, has petitioned for her parents to immigrate to the United States. Applicant’s wife’s 
parents were interviewed by U.S. immigration officials in March 2018. Applicant’s wife 
has also petitioned for her younger sister, who currently resides in Canada, to immigrate 
to the United States. One of Applicant’s wife’s brothers resides in the United States. 
Applicant’s wife has one brother and one sister who remain in Azerbaijan. (Tr. 26-27.) 
Applicant’s wife maintains frequent contact with her family members in Azerbaijan, 
Applicant and his wife have provided financial support for her family in the past, and they 
last visited Azerbaijan in 2012. However, the financial support was infrequent, totaling 
approximately $10,000 over many years, and had no impact on Applicant’s overall 
financial circumstances. Applicant’s wife’s ownership of the family home in Azerbaijan is 
indivisible from that of her other family members and she does not anticipate inheriting 
the property or any money from its potential sale. Applicant’s wife is active in her church 
                                            
1 Applicant and his wife testified about the conditions and conflict in Azerbaijan and I supplemented their testimony with 
facts from several U.S. Government-based websites. 
5 
 
and local community and considers the United States to be her home. (AX A.) Applicant 
has infrequent contact with his wife’s family. (Tr. 62-63.) 
   
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
6 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
       
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information…. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
7 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose due to conditions that were primarily beyond 
his control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant experienced 
significant periods of unemployment and underemployment beginning in 2005. In 2007, 
he relocated to another state for a job, and was responsible for his family’s living expenses 
as well as the mortgage-loan payment for the family’s house in his home state. Applicant 
diligently attempted to maintain the mortgage-loan payments. He rented the house to 
three separate renters, he attempted to sell the house on several occasions, he tried to 
enter a mortgage-loan modification agreement, and he arranged for a short sale of the 
house. During part of this 10 year effort, Applicant worked two jobs. Despite his efforts 
and the depletion of his 401(k) savings, Applicant ultimately lost the house to foreclosure. 
Applicant has not been contacted by any entity attempting to collect a deficiency balance 
for the house, and the house sold for more than Applicant owed on the mortgage loan. 
While underemployed in 2012 and still struggling with living expenses and the mortgage-
loan payments, Applicant’s car and motorcycle were repossessed. He did not owe a 
deficiency balance on the motorcycle and he has paid the balance due for the car. 
Applicant also paid the balance due for a rental car. He has paid or otherwise resolved 
the SOR debts. He has not incurred any delinquent debt since 2012, lives within his 
means, and is financially stable. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The concern is set forth in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are applicable: AG ¶ 7  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
8 
 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The mere possession of 
ties with family in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, if an applicant or his spouse has such a relationship, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). A[T]here is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002); see also ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 16, 2011).  The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as 
well as each individual family tie must be considered. 
 
Applicant’s wife’s family members living in Azerbaijan are among a minority subject 
to discrimination due to their ethnic background and religious affiliation and are 
considered to be displaced as a result of the 1992 conflict. The Azerbaijan government is 
known to commit human rights violations, including government intervention on personal 
freedoms. Given the ongoing conflict in Azerbaijan and the potential targeting of 
Applicant’s wife’s family, Applicant’s relationships with his wife’s family members and 
property interest creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation and coercion and the 
potential risk for a conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
9 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(d): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; 
 
AG ¶ 8(f):  the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
 The evidence in the record mitigates the concerns about Applicant and his wife’s 
relationships with her family members who are Azerbaijan nationals. While Applicant’s 
wife’s family members are among a group discriminated against for their ethnic 
background and religion, they do not participate in professions or activities that are likely 
to place Applicant in a position of having to choose between foreign interests and U.S. 
interests. Applicant’s wife has lived in the United States for more than 15 years, has been 
a citizen since 2009, and considers the United States to be her home. Her brother resides 
in the United States. She has petitioned for her parents to become permanent residents 
and they have undergone their interviews with immigration officials. She has also 
petitioned for her sister, a resident of Canada, to immigrate to the United States. 
Applicant’s wife’s potential inheritance interest in the family home in Azerbaijan is 
indivisible from that of her family members and she does not anticipate or rely on inheriting 
her share of it. Applicant and his wife’s minimal financial support of her family members 
does not raise security concerns. Applicant properly reported his foreign contacts. AG ¶¶ 
8(a), 8(b), 8(d), and 8(f) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a), an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
all relevant circumstances. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and B 
in my whole-person analysis and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a).   
10 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by prior financial circumstances and his wife’s 
family members in Azerbaijan. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
