1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03486 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information.  He presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern stemming from his drug involvement and substance 
abuse. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2017, Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86 format). On October 18, 2017, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns under the drug 
involvement and substance misuse guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
November 17, 2017, and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for continued 
access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here.  
2 
 
  
 A hearing was scheduled for July 18, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the 
parties. Applicant testified at the hearing and offered two exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. The exhibit offered by the 
Government at the hearing was admitted without objection (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 26, 2018.  
   
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old, a college graduate, and married with two children (ages 
three and seven months). Since January 2004, he has worked for a defense contractor. 
This is Applicant’s first security clearance application.2 
 
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequencies from about January 2000 to about May 2017. The SOR also alleged that he 
used cocaine with varying frequencies in about January 2017.3 Applicant denied the 
marijuana use, observing that the reporting period was the past seven years, but the SOR 
alleged use back to 2000. Applicant also denied the cocaine use, stating that “varying 
frequencies” was not based in fact.4 The SOR, however, is based on facts provided by 
Applicant in his security clearance application.5 
 
Applicant testified that he began using marijuana during his undergraduate days, 
beginning in January 2000.  Thereafter, he used marijuana once or twice a year at social 
occasions in college. After Applicant married in 2013, his marijuana use was once or twice 
a year or less. His use decreased after his first child was born in 2015. He never used it 
in the presence of his family or his wife. Applicant never purchased, possessed, or 
supplied marijuana. Applicant used cocaine once at a party in January 2017.6 He did not 
buy or supply the cocaine. Applicant knew marijuana use and cocaine use were illegal.7 
His last use of marijuana was at a concert in May 2017. His wife and in-laws were present. 
He did not smoke marijuana that time; it was in a candy gummy bear, and he just took a 
bite.8  
 
A number of factors affected Applicant’s marijuana use over time. First, he married 
in March 2013. His use of marijuana decreased as a result. He never used marijuana with 
                                                          
2 GE 1; Tr. 20-26, 29.  
 
3 SOR ¶ 1.  
 
4 Answer ¶ 1.a and ¶ 1.b.  
 
5 GE 1.  
 
6 Applicant’s use of cocaine was once or twice, at most in January 2017. GE 1.  
 
7 Tr. 22-26, 30-31.  
 
8 Tr. 26-31. 
 
3 
 
his wife. Second, the birth of Applicant’s first child in 2015 caused him to think about the 
implications of his marijuana use. Third, when Applicant was informed in May 2017 that 
he would be applying for a security clearance, he decided to abstain altogether. He has 
done so. Applicant will continue to abstain and will participate in random drug testing, if 
necessary.9 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 12, 15, 22, 24, 29.  
4 
 
     Discussion 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug use,10 suitability of an applicant may be questioned or 
put into doubt because drug use can both impair judgment and raise questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any "controlled substance" as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe any 
of the behaviors listed above. 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including. . .         
purchase.                              
 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and found the 
following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
   
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited 
to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and, (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
                                                          
10 AG ¶¶ 24, 25 and 26 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
5 
 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Marijuana and cocaine are Schedule I controlled substances, the possession of 
which is regulated by the federal government under the Controlled Substances Act.11 The 
knowing or intentional possession and use of any controlled substance is unlawful and 
punishable by imprisonment and or a fine.12 In an October 25, 2014 memorandum, the 
Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the use of marijuana is relevant to national 
security determinations, regardless of changes to state laws concerning marijuana use.13  
 
 The evidence established that Applicant used marijuana on a recreational basis 
once or twice a year from January 2000 to May 2017. He deliberately decided to abstain 
altogether in May 2017. His use of cocaine was far less often than his use of marijuana, 
perhaps once or twice at a party in January 2017. This illegal drug use triggers security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). The next inquiry is whether those concerns are 
mitigated.  
 
 Applicant’s last admitted drug use was in May 2017. He used cocaine, giving him 
the benefit of the doubt, at most twice and only in January 2017. These recent usages, 
however, prevents AG ¶ 26(a) from applying.  
 
 Applicant relies heavily on his period of abstinence from May 2017 to present. He 
also relies on his stated intention to abstain from all drug abuse in the future. Applicant 
also points to his marriage and the birth of his two children as positive factors. Those are, 
indeed, all positive factors.14 The problem is that his recent period of abstinence is 
outweighed by his 17 years of marijuana usage. In this context, 14 or so months of 
abstinence is not a long enough established pattern of abstinence. AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 The record raises doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.15 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
11 21 U.S.C. § 811 et seq.   
 
12 21 U.S.C. § 844. 
 
13 James R. Clapper, Director of National Intelligence, Memorandum: Adherence to Federal Laws 
Prohibiting Marijuana Use (October 25, 2014). See also http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml. 
 
14 That being said, it should be noted that his marriage and the birth of his first child did not deter him from 
the illegal use of drugs. Those events may, however, have decreased his usage.  
 
15 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:          Against Applicant 
   
       Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:         Against Applicant 
 
    Conclusion 
  
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
 
 
 
   Philip J. Katauskas 
  Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
