 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01371 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a review based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. (Answer.) The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge in July 2018, but was assigned to me on September 12, 2018. 
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 30, 2018. 
The Government submitted seven Items for the record. Applicant timely responded to the 
FORM with a packet of documentation, which was marked as AX A, and entered into the 
record without objection. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 35, is divorced and has two children. He graduated from high school 
in 2001 and attended college classes for several years. He obtained an associate’s 
degree in 2013. He served in the U.S. Navy from 2001 to 2006, and in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from 2006 to 2010. Applicant completed a security clearance application on March 
5, 2016. He held a security clearance while in the military. (Item 3)  He is currently 
sponsored by a federal contractor. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has delinquent debt in the amount of $83,484 of 
which $68,034 is attributable to child support arrears. Applicant admits four of the alleged 
debts (SOR paragraphs 1. a through d) and denies the remaining five (SOR paragraphs 
1.e through 1.i). The debts alleged on the SOR are supported by Applicant’s credit 
reports. (Items 5,6,7) 
 
Applicant was deployed in Afghanistan at the time of the SOR. He provided  
explanations and documentation for the child support arrears. In addition, he provided a 
letter showing recent misdirection of his child support payments and a returned check in 
the amount of $375. (Attachment to Answer) Applicant has two child support accounts. 
He stated that the arrearages are high because after he left the military, he could not find 
civilian work that would allow him to obtain legal representation to apply for a court 
modification. He states that he is paying a monthly amount of $1,074.61, and the amount 
is withheld from his paycheck.  However, he did not provide a pay slip verifying his claim. 
For SOR 1.a, he states that the past-due amount is $20,173. Applicant provided two 
financial activity report sheets from 2017 and 2018 as proof of his payment history. (AX 
A) It is unclear from the payment history to determine what actual payments Applicant 
made. 
 
As to SOR 1.b, Applicant states that he is paying $750 a month for the child support 
arrearage, which is also taken directly from his pay. There is only one case number; so it 
appears that the two accounts have merged into one account. The report shows that 
payments have been applied to the arrearages and balances. (AX A) He also stated that 
the child support account listed in SOR 1.g for $8,589 is not valid because it is not on his 
credit report and it should have been absorbed into the other child support accounts. 
There is no documentation to support this claim. 
 
Applicant provided a settlement letter for the debt in SOR 1.c. The past-due 
amount was $14,924.60, but he received a settlement offer for $$5,900. The monthly 
payment of $1,000 was to start in May 2018. There is no evidence of acceptance or any 
payments made. 
 
As to SOR accounts, SOR 1.d for $1,162, Applicant stated that he called the 
collection agency and has made payment arrangements of $160 per month. However, he 
did not submit any evidence of this plan. 
 
 
3 
 
As to SOR 1. e and SOR 1.f for $78.86 (appear to be duplicates), Applicant 
submitted documentation that the account has been paid in full. (AX A)  
 
As to the debt in SOR 1.h, Applicant submitted a letter verifying that the account 
has been settled and the balance is zero. 
 
Applicant denied the SOR 1.i account and stated that he was unaware of the debt 
before the clearance process. He called the creditor and was told that the debt no longer 
exists, has been resolved, and has a zero balance. (Answer to SOR)  
 
Applicant noted that he has been a faithful servant to his country for the majority 
of his adult life. He admits mistakes in the past, but since acquiring his current job he has 
the financial resources to address his debts. He was current with child support while in 
the military, but he told the investigator in 2016 that he made payments outside of the 
court system when he left the military and he estimates that for the approximate $8,000 
in payment, he never received credit. (Item 4) He did not provide any proof of payments. 
 
Applicant reported no debt counseling, but is working with a financial advisor. He 
now reviews his credit reports and has a secure credit card. (AX A) There is no information 
in the record concerning Applicant’s current salary or whether he will be working abroad. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
 
5 
 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are the result of delinquent or past-due child support payments 
that were not consistently made after he left the military in 2010, which resulted in 
arrearages that accumulated.  He had employment in the civilian world, which apparently 
was not sufficient to pay the child support and there were some problems with the agency 
when he was deployed. He noted that some of the other accounts were unknown to him. 
The record does not provide detailed information. 
 
Applicant presented recent information about his payment history to the child 
support agency and the mix up that occurred when he was deployed concerning where 
the amounts were sent. He is making payments to the accounts. He has settled or paid 
two accounts. He obtained a settlement offer for another account, but he has not 
produced evidence of any payments. AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully applicable due to lack of 
clarifying information.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. It is not clear from the record the degree to 
which the financial situation with the child support arrearages was beyond Applicant’s 
ability to arrange and control. His inability to maintain the child support payments from 
2010 to 2017, while he was employed, leave me with doubts as to his actions being 
responsible under the circumstances. The arrearages are substantial, and he presented 
information of payments from 2017, ten years after leaving the military.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. He is working with a financial counselor.  AG 
20(d) is partially established. Applicant is adhering to good-faith efforts now to address 
child support and other accounts. He did not produce sufficient documentation to fully  
support this mitigating condition. Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the financial 
concerns set out in the SOR.  
 
6 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his many years of military service, I conclude that Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, 
Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-i:   Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
7 
 
 
