KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather,
it contains reference letters that were not previously presented to the Judge for consideration. 
The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02496.a1
DATE: 09/17/2018
DATE: September 17, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02496
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 21,  2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)  and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On July 6, 2018, after considering
the record, Administrative Judge Robert Robinson Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
 Applicant’s appeal brief raises no allegation of error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it
contains reference letters that were not previously presented to the Judge for consideration.  The
Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  His brief also contains
a narrative statement about his efforts to resolve his financial problems and his claim that he has
never once displayed a lack of candor when it came to the security or mission of our military. 
  
The Board does not review cases de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Because Applicant has not made such an allegation of error, the decision of the Judge denying
Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale         
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
