 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03362 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 24, 2017. On 
October 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines D and E.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on January 29, 2018. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM and submitted a letter from his spouse 
in response, marked as Applicant’s exhibit (AE) A. Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 to 10 
and AE A are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old software engineer, employed by a defense contractor 
since July 2016. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2008. He married in 2008. He 
previously held a DOD security clearance but was denied continued eligibility for access 
to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in January 2017 after disclosing 
disqualifying information during a full-scope polygraph exam. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline D, and cross-alleged under Guideline E, that 
Applicant viewed child pornography from 1998 to 2015. Applicant admitted both SOR 
allegations. During a polygraph exam in 2015 by a DOD agency, Applicant admitted that 
between the ages of 13 to 17 years old, he actively searched, downloaded, and viewed 
pornographic images of humans and anime between the ages of a “fetus to a 
grandmother.” He claims that he stopped actively seeking out child pornography in 2002, 
but between 2002 and 2015, he would “stumble” upon sexually explicit images of children 
while viewing pornography.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that as an adult, he found these 
images by accident as they appeared in “pop-ups” and were unintentional. He took steps 
to prevent unintentional child pornography images from appearing by accessing more 
reputable websites. He also told his spouse about his website viewing and agreed to stop 
viewing pornography altogether. Applicant acknowledged in his Answer that his behavior 
showed a severe lack of good judgment. 
 
Applicant submitted a favorable character reference letter from his spouse, who 
discussed his revelation of his pornography viewing and the incidents which led to his 
SOR. She has forgiven him, helped him stop all further pornography viewing, and 
encouraged him to attend church regularly. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
3 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D: Sexual Behavior 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. 
AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following condition may be applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 Applicant’s inappropriate and illegal behavior, including accessing child 
pornography over a number of years, raise the disqualifying conditions above. 
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I reviewed the 
facts against all of the mitigating conditions. No mitigating condition fully applies. 
Applicant’s actions with regard to the SOR allegation under this guideline involves 
repeated inappropriate and criminal conduct that reflects a lack of good judgment and a 
pattern of inappropriate sexual behavior. The occurrences were frequent, happened 
under normal circumstances, and continued until at least 2015. Applicant has claimed 
responsibility for his actions, but has not submitted to psychological treatment or provided 
other evidence to mitigate his behavior, nor has he sufficiently demonstrated that the 
behavior has ceased and will not recur. Based on the record and the length of time the 
behavior occurred, there is insufficient evidence in the record to believe that Applicant’s 
inappropriate conduct has permanently ceased or that it will recur in the future. 
 
 
5 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
  The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶16 are: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issues areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This includes 
but is not limited to, consideration of:  
   
. . . 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior . . . . 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
  Applicant’s conduct as noted in the findings of fact, invokes an assessment of 
questionable judgment and personal conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), and (e) apply. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
  Applicant’s behavior, taken as a whole, shows a pattern of unmitigated 
inappropriate activity. Despite his recent claims of abstinence from child pornography, 
Applicant’s judgment continues to be questionable. He has not submitted sufficient 
evidence to alleviate those concerns. The allegations are not minor, nor did they occur in 
unique circumstances where they are not likely to recur. He has not taken sufficient steps 
to remediate his behavior or eliminate the vulnerabilities that it creates. I find no mitigating 
condition is fully applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant has shown a history of inappropriate sexual conduct. His actions have 
not been appropriately mitigated by counseling or psychological treatment, and he has 
not shown sufficient evidence that continued misconduct will not occur in the future. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to classified information.2 
 
 
                                                     
2 No exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, are applicable. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
