 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02568 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns 
relating to his connections to Iraq and Jordan because of his deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States and his willingness to renounce his Iraq 
citizenship. He is expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. 
He contributed to U.S. national security by serving as a linguist under dangerous 
conditions in Iraq, and he wishes to continue to serve under such circumstances in Iraq. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On October 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017.   
 
 
2                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence and 
foreign preference guidelines. 
 
On December 18, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 3) On May 10, 2018, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On May 15, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On May 23, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for June 13, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits; Applicant relied 
upon the 15 documents attached to his SOR response; there were no objections; and 
all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. (Transcript (Tr.) 13, 15, 18-20; 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1-3; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE N) On June 21, 2018, DOHA 
received a transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered summaries for administrative notice concerning 
foreign influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s connections to Iraq and 
Jordan. (Tr. 20) Applicant did not object to me taking administrative notice of facts 
concerning Iraq and Jordan, and I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 20-21) 
Department Counsel and Applicant indicated they had no objection to me taking 
administrative notice of facts from the U.S. Department of State website concerning Iraq 
and Jordan.1 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 16-02522 at 2-3 (App. Bd. July 12, 
2017); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-
24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 
n. 4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is accorded to 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE 
LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative 
notice).  
 
Portions of the Department Counsel’s requests are quoted without quotation 
marks and footnotes in the Iraq and Jordan sections of this decision, infra. The first two 
paragraphs and the last paragraph in the Iraq section are from the State Department 
website U.S. Relations with Iraq Fact Sheet, and the remainder, except for the last 
paragraph, is from Department Counsel’s administrative notice request. (Tr. 20) The 
                                            
1 The first two paragraphs in the Iraq section of this decision are from the U.S. Department of 
State website, “U.S. Relations With Iraq Fact Sheet,” Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs (Apr. 28, 2017), 
https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/6804.htm. Statements about the United States’ relationship with Iraq 
from the Department of State are admissible. See ISCR Case No. 02-00318 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 
2004). 
 
3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
first and last paragraph in the Jordan section are from the State Department website 
and the remainder is from Department Counsel’s administrative notice request. 
  
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. (HE 3) He 
also provided mitigating information. (HE 3) His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old linguist, and DOD contractors have employed him for 
one year in Iraq. (Tr. 8, 20) In 1996, he received a bachelor’s degree in Iraq. (Tr. 8-9) In 
2014, he was awarded a high school diploma from a learning center in the United 
States. (AE G) In 1999, he married, and his five daughters are ages 4, 9, 13, 15, and 
17. (Tr. 9) His three oldest children were born in Iraq; his fourth child was born in 
Jordan; and his fifth child was born in the United States. (Tr. 9) He performed his 
mandatory service in the Iraq army for 18 months. (Tr. 28)  
 
In 2006, Applicant, his wife and three daughters emigrated from Iraq to Jordan 
because of the violence in Iraq. (Tr. 30-31, 36-37) His brother and sisters were already 
in Jordan. (Tr. 30) In 2010, the State Department approved Applicant as a refugee, and 
he emigrated from Jordan to the United States. (Tr. 9-10; GE 2) In 2015, he and his 
spouse became U.S. citizens. (Tr. 9-10; AE I; AE J) They took the oath of allegiance to 
the United States. (AE I; AE J) A letter from President Obama to Applicant and his 
spouse emphasizes the importance of this “solemn oath” and the sacrifices that may be 
entailed in U.S. citizenship. (AE K) The Naturalization Oath of Allegiance to the United 
States of America states: 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; 
that I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arms on behalf 
of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform 
noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the United States when 
required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under 
civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation 
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me 
God.3 
                                            
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 The language of the current Oath of Allegiance is found in the Code of Federal Regulations 
Section 337.1 and is closely based upon the statutory elements in Section 337(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 8 U.S.C. § 1448, https://www.uscis.gov/us-
citizenship/naturalization-test/naturalization-oath-allegiance-united-states-america. 
 
4                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
From February 2017 to February 2018, Applicant worked in Iraq with U.S. 
Special Operations Forces and Coalition Forces in Iraq as a linguist. (Tr. 10, 23-25) He 
plans to return to Iraq to continue to assist U.S. forces. (Tr. 28) 
  
The SOR alleges: (1) Applicant’s father, step-mother, step-sister, and two step-
brothers are citizens and residents of Iraq; (2) His spouse, five children, and one brother 
are dual citizens of the United States and Iraq; and (3) His three sisters and one brother 
are citizens of Iraq and reside in Jordan. In 2016, Applicant told an investigator that Iraq 
was “my country” and the United States was “my second country.” (HE 2)  
 
Applicant admitted: (1) His step-mother, step-sister, and one step-brother4 are 
citizens and residents of Iraq; (2) Applicant and his spouse were born in Iraq; they are 
U.S. citizens; and they destroyed their Iraq passports; (3) Three of his children were 
born in Iraq; one was born in Jordan; his children have U.S. citizenship; and they do not 
possess Iraq passports; (4) One brother is a dual citizen of the United States and Iraq; 
(5) His three sisters and brother reside in Jordan and are not connected to Iraq except 
by their Iraq citizenship; (6) Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq; 
and (7) His father is a citizen of Iraq and currently resides in Jordan. (Tr. 31-50; HE 2) 
 
In 1987, Applicant’s mother passed away, and in 1989, his father remarried. (Tr. 
31, 49) His father recently moved from Iraq to Jordan because of differences with 
Applicant’s step-mother, and his father believed his daughters living in Jordan would 
take care of him. (Tr. 31-33) His mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq. (Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant does not have any current contacts with his step-mother or step-
siblings. (Tr. 33) Applicant’s brother immigrated to the United States in 2009 or 2010. 
(Tr. 34) Around 2012, one of Applicant’s sisters and her husband and children 
immigrated to the United States. (Tr. 34) Applicant indicated he and some of his family 
members residing in the United States had lost or renounced their Iraq citizenship 
because they had given up or not renewed their Iraq passports. (Tr. 34-35, 40-41) He 
and his family members are presumed to retain Iraq citizenship unless they have taken 
affirmative actions to renounce their Iraq citizenships.5 He provided his Iraq passport to 
his security officer, and it was subsequently destroyed. (AE M) He did not describe any 
affirmative actions to renounce his Iraq citizenship beyond his statements, oath of 
allegiance, and destruction of his Iraq passport.  
 
Applicant left Iraq in 2006, and he next returned to Iraq in 2016 to visit his father. 
(Tr. 36-37, 49) His most recent visit to Jordan was in 2010 before he immigrated to the 
United States. (Tr. 37, 50) He does not intend to visit family in Iraq. (Tr. 38) In 2017, 
Applicant’s spouse and children went to Iraq to visit Applicant’s mother-in-law who was 
ill. (Tr. 42) 
 
                                            
4 One of his step-brothers was killed in a car accident last year. 
 
5 See Iraq Nationality Law, which was amended in 2006 to recognize dual nationality. 
https://www.revolvy.com/page/Iraqi-nationality-law. Applicant was unaware of the process to formally 
renounce Iraq citizenship. (Tr. 41) 
 
5                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Applicant’s three sisters reside in Jordan, and two of them are married to 
Jordanian men. (Tr. 43) Two of his sisters do not work outside their homes, and one 
sister is an engineer. (Tr. 43) His family members in Jordan are not employed by the 
Jordanian government or in the Jordanian military. (Tr. 44) He communicates with his 
father about every three weeks and with his siblings in Jordan every two or three 
months. (Tr. 44-45) When his father lived in Iraq, he frequently called or communicated 
with his father, and he communicated with any step-relatives who were present and 
wished to say hello to him. (Tr. 54-56) He does not currently communicate with anyone 
in Iraq. (Tr. 49, 56) He most recently communicated in-person with his step-relatives in 
Iraq in 2016 when he went to visit his father. (Tr. 49) In sum, Applicant has frequent 
contacts6 with his father and several siblings living in Jordan, and he previously had 
frequent contacts with his step-siblings in Iraq when he called his father. His relatives in 
the Middle East are unaware of Applicant’s work as a linguist. (Tr. 45-46) 
 
In 2017, Applicant purchased a home in the United States. (Tr. 46) His only bank 
account is in the United States. (Tr. 47; AE L) He does not provide any financial support 
to his family in Iraq or Jordan. (Tr. 47)  
 
In his 2016 counterintelligence (CI) interview, Applicant said his first country was 
Iraq, and his second country was the United States. (Tr. 51) He also referred to Iraq as 
“his country” several times during his CI interview. (GE 2) He told the investigator that 
he would not renounce his Iraq citizenship. (GE 2) 
 
At his hearing, he explained that he was born in Iraq, and it was his first country. 
(Tr. 51) His second citizenship was his U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 51) He was awkwardly 
explaining to the investigator in chronological fashion his relationships with Iraq and the 
United States and not rating the priority of his loyalties. (Tr. 51-52) When he first went to 
Iraq as a linguist, he did it for the money. (Tr. 58) When he served in Iraq, he went 
outside his base with small Special Operations teams and faced dangers from snipers 
and improvised explosive devices (IED). (Tr. 57) The military personnel who served with 
him were “so awesome.” (Tr. 57) They risked their lives to protect Applicant from sniper 
fire and IEDs. (Tr. 57) During his service in Iraq, he changed. (Tr. 58) He wanted to 
serve in Iraq because he wanted to help the United States and not just for the money. 
(Tr. 58) The military personnel he served with in Iraq inspired him and caused him to 
feel patriotism and loyalty to the United States. (Tr. 58)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
On November 27, 2017, Applicant’s employer in Iraq described him as 
professional, trustworthy, and helpful. (AE A) He provided “instrumental” contributions to 
mission accomplishment. (AE A) Two U.S. Army captains indicated from August to 
November 2017, Applicant provided training on laws of armed conflict, explosive 
hazards awareness, marksmanship, and other military skills to Coalition Forces. (AE D) 
They indicated Applicant was professional, diligent, and responsible. (AE D)     
                                            
6 The Appeal Board has concluded that contact every two months or more frequently constitutes 
“frequent contact” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2016). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings 
once every four or five months not casual and infrequent). 
 
6                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Iraq 
 
The U.S. Mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership 
with Iraq and the Iraqi people. The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq 
marked a milestone in our relationship as Iraq continues to develop as a sovereign, 
stable, and self-reliant country. Iraq is now a key partner for the U.S. in the region as 
well as a voice of moderation and democracy in the Middle East. Iraq has functioning 
government institutions including an active legislature, is playing an increasingly 
constructive role in the region, and has a bright economic future as oil revenues surpass 
pre-Saddam production levels with continued rapid growth to come. The U.S. maintains 
vigorous and broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and 
security issues in accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement. 
 
The Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) between Iraq and the U.S. provides 
the basis for the U.S.-Iraq bilateral relationship. It covers the range of bilateral issues 
including political relations and diplomacy, defense and security, trade and finance, 
energy, judicial and law enforcement issues, services, science, culture, education, and 
environment. Efforts to implement the SFA are overseen by the Higher Coordinating 
Committee and several Joint Coordination Committees, which meet periodically. 
 
The U.S. State Department warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for 
violence and kidnapping, and advises U.S. citizens not to travel to Iraq. The current 
travel advisory level is Level 4: Do not travel.  
 
The ability of the U.S. Embassy to provide consular services to U.S. citizens 
outside Baghdad is limited given the security environment. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. Kidnappings and 
attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED) occur in many areas of the country, 
including Baghdad. Methods of attack have included explosively formed penetrators 
(EFPs), magnetic IEDs placed on vehicles, human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines 
placed on or concealed near roads, mortars and rockets, and shootings using various 
direct fire weapons. Such attacks may take place in public venues such as cafes and 
markets.  
 
Iraq witnessed continued terrorist activity in 2016, primarily as a result of the 
actions of Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIL). In 2016, ISIL remained the greatest 
terrorist threat globally, maintaining a formidable force in Syria, including a large number 
of foreign terrorist fighters. ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq has dramatically 
eroded in the past two years. According to estimates from the UN Assistance Mission 
for Iraq, acts of terrorism and violence killed more than 7,000 civilians and injured more 
than 12,000 in 2016. By the end of 2017, Iraqi Security Forces had liberated all terriroty 
from ISIL, drastically reducing ISIL’s ability to commit abuses and atrocities. Human 
rights violations continue to be a problem with allegations of unlawful killings and other 
abuses being made against the Iraqi Security Forces and Popular Mobilization Forces.  
 
In its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State reported that 
severe human rights problems were widespread. Sectarian hostility, widespread 
corruption, and lack of transparency at all levels of government and society weakened 
 
7                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
the government's authority and worsened effective human rights protections. Iraqi 
Security Forces, members of the Federal Police, and the Peshmerga committed some 
human rights violations, and there continued to be reports of Popular Mobilization 
Forces killing, torturing, kidnapping, and extorting civilians. ISIL committed the 
overwhelming majority of serious human rights abuses, including attacks against: 
civilians, (particularly Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL); members of other 
religious and ethnic minorities; women; and children. 
 
Observers also reported other significant human rights-related problems: harsh 
and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities; arbitrary arrest and 
lengthy pretrial detention, denial of fair public trial; insufficient judicial institutional 
capacity; ineffective implementation of civil judicial procedures and remedies; arbitrary 
interference with privacy and homes; child soldiers; limits on freedom of expression, 
including press freedoms; violence against and harassment of journalists; undue 
censorship; social, religious, and political restrictions in academic and cultural matters; 
limits on freedoms of peaceful assembly and association; limits on religious freedom 
due to violence by extremist groups; restrictions on freedom of movement; refugee and 
internally displaced persons (IDP) abuse; both forced IDP returns and preventing IDPs 
from returning home; discrimination against and societal abuse of women and ethnic, 
religious, and racial minorities, including exclusion from decision-making roles; 
trafficking in persons; societal discrimination and violence against lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons; seizure of property without due 
process; and limitations on worker rights. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Iraq is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Iraq to its citizens and residents and Iraq 
government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top national 
security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, training, and 
support of the Iraq Government and military in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Jordan 
 
In 2013 and 2014, the U.S. provided Jordan $2.25 billion in loan guarantees, 
allowing Jordan access to affordable financing from international capital markets. The 
U.S.-Jordan free trade agreement (FTA), the U.S.’s first FTA with an Arab country, has 
expanded the trade relationship by reducing barriers for services, providing cutting-edge 
protection for intellectual property, ensuring regulatory transparency, and requiring 
effective labor and environmental enforcement. The United States and Jordan have an 
“open skies” civil aviation agreement; a bilateral investment treaty; a science and 
technology cooperation agreement; and a memorandum of understanding on nuclear 
energy cooperation. Such agreements bolster efforts to help diversify Jordan’s economy 
and promote growth. Jordan and the United States belong to a number of the same 
international organizations, including the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, 
World Bank, and World Trade Organization. Jordan also is a Partner for Cooperation 
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
 
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan) is a constitutional monarchy ruled by 
King Abdullah II bin Hussein.  
 
8                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
  The U.S. Department of State assesses the threat of terrorism in Jordan as high; 
with the capital of Amman currently assessed as a high-threat location for terrorist 
activity directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. Transnational and 
indigenous terrorist groups in Jordan have demonstrated the capability to plan and 
implement attacks. Violent extremist groups in Syria and Iraq, including the Islamic 
State of lraq and the Levant (ISIL) (also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or 
ISIS) and Jabhat al-Nusra, have conducted attacks in Jordan and continue to plot 
against local security forces, U.S. and Western interests, and soft targets such as high-
profile public events, hotels, places of worship, restaurants, schools, and malls.  
Jordan’s prominent role in the effort to defeat ISIS, and its shared borders with Iraq and 
Syria, increase the potential for future terrorist incidents. 
 
Although Jordan remained a committed partner on counterterrorism and 
countering violent extremism in 2016, numerous terrorist incidents reflect the current 
security situation in Jordan: throughout 2017, multiple vehicle-borne improvised 
explosive devices detonated in and around a refugee camp in Syria near the Jordanian 
border; and in October 2017, two homemade explosive devices were found in another 
refugee camp in Jordan. Also in October 2017, the State Security Court prosecuted six 
people for sympathizing with ISIS, after they created social media accounts to find 
Jordanian supporters for ISIS and promote terrorist activity. In September 2017, the 
State Security Court charged 16 people with a terrorist plot involving the use of 
automatic weapons to carry out terrorist attacks against public security services; and the 
Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate arrested a 10-person ISIS cell that was 
planning to attack security forces and tourist locations using explosive suicide belts. 
Throughout 2017, there were numerous instances of extremists posting pro-ISIS videos 
or statements on social media.  
 
U.S. involvement in Iraq and Syria, and the U.S. Government’s policies on Israel, 
have fueled anti-American feelings in Jordan. Recent surveys reflect that over 80% of 
the Jordanian population has an unfavorable view of the U.S. Government. The U.S. 
Department of State has assessed Amman as being a high-threat location for political 
violence directed at or affecting official U.S. Government interests. In December 2017, 
protests took place at the U.S. Embassy for 27 days after the announcement that the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv would move to Jerusalem. 
 
As a regional leader in the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, Jordan played an 
important role in Coalition successes in degrading the terrorist group’s territorial control 
and operational reach. During 2016, Jordanian authorities took legal action against 
numerous individuals accused of terrorism under Jordanian law. On July 13, 2016, the 
Jordanian State Security Court filed charges against 21 suspected ISIS affiliates in 
connection with the pre-emptive March raid on an alleged ISIS safe house in lrbid. The 
Department of State assesses that the potential for terrorist activity is heightened as 
Jordan participates in the coalition against ISIS. Extremist groups have carried out 
terrorist activities against U.S. and Jordanian government targets in Jordan. 
 
Terrorist groups often do not distinguish between U.S. Government personnel 
and private U.S. citizens, and may target areas frequented by Westerners, such as 
tourist sites, hotels, restaurants, shopping malls, and transportation hubs. 
 
9                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
According to the Department of State 2017 Human Rights Report, Jordan’s most 
significant continuing human rights problems include allegations of torture by security 
and government officials; arbitrary arrest and detention, including of activists and 
journalists; infringements on privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of expression; and 
restrictions on freedom of association and assembly. Impunity remained widespread, 
and the government did not take sufficiently strong steps to investigate, prosecute, or 
punish officials who committed abuses.   
 
The Jordanian SSC took legal action against numerous individuals deemed to be 
terrorists under local law, including the arrest and prosecution of men accused of 
seeking to join Al-Nusra Front (ANF) and ISIS. Other arrests and prosecutions involved 
supporting/recruiting for ISIS and attempted travel to/from Syria in  support of extremist 
activities and also for “propagating ISIL ideology,” a charge often used for online 
activity. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Exec. Or. 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should 
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
 
10                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President,  
Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
11                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant admitted: (1) His step-mother, step-sister, and one step-brother  are 
citizens and residents of Iraq; (2) Applicant and his spouse were born in Iraq; they are 
U.S. citizens; and they destroyed their Iraq passports; (3) Three of his children were 
born in Iraq; one was born in Jordan; his children have U.S. citizenship; and they do not 
possess Iraq passports; (4) One brother is a dual citizen of the United States and Iraq; 
(5) His three sisters and brother reside in Jordan and are not connected to Iraq except 
by their Iraq citizenship; (6) Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq; 
and (7) His father is a citizen of Iraq and currently resides in Jordan.  
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his father and his siblings living in Jordan. His 
spouse is a dual citizen of the United States and Iraq, and she recently visited her 
mother in Iraq. His and his spouse’s frequent contacts with relatives in Iraq and Jordan 
are manifestations of their care and concern for relatives living in those countries.  
 
When an allegation under a disqualifying condition is established, “the Directive 
presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct or 
circumstances . . . and an applicant’s security [or trustworthiness] eligibility. Direct or 
objective evidence of nexus is not required.”  ISCR Case No. 17-00507 at 2 (App. Bd. 
June 13, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-08385 at 4 (App. Bd. May 23, 2018)). 
 
There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Iraq and Jordan 
primarily because of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those 
dangers on behalf of the DOD, and he is willing to do so in the future. Numerous 
linguists, supporting U.S. forces, have family living in Iraq. Thousands of United States 
and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Iraq are targets of 
terrorists, along with Iraqi civilians who support the Iraqi government and cooperate with 
coalition forces.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with relatives living in Iraq is not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or his or her 
spouse has such a relationship with even one person living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009) (discussing problematic visits of applicant’s father to Iran).7  
  
                                            
7 In accordance with “well established DoD policy [Applicant and his family’s] religious affiliation 
play[ed] no part” in this decision. ISCR Case No. 08-06795 at 6 n. 3 (App. Bd. May 25, 2012). 
 
 
12                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, his or her immediate family members, and this presumption includes in-
laws. ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 05-
00939 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 
20, 2002).    
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has indicated for Guideline B cases, “the nature of the 
foreign government involved and the intelligence-gathering history of that government 
are among the important considerations that provide context for the other record 
evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case. 
The country’s human rights record is another important consideration.” ISCR Case No. 
16-02435 at 3 (May 15, 2018) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-00528 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 13, 
2017)). Another important consideration is the nature of a nation’s government’s 
relationship with the United States. These factors are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members living in that country are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement.  
 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, the government ignores the rule of law 
including widely accepted civil liberties, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, the government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, 
terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property damage, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationships of Iraq and Jordan with the United States, and the situation in those 
countries places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
relationship with any family member living in or visiting those countries does not pose a 
trustworthiness or security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a 
relative living in or visiting Iraq or Jordan.8  
 
Guideline B security or trustworthiness concerns are not limited to countries 
hostile to the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in protecting 
and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is 
not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 
at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
                                            
8 The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 03-24933, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 346 at *20-*21 n. 18 (App. 
Bd. 2005), explained how relatives in a foreign country have a security significance: 
 
The issue under Guideline B is not whether an applicant’s immediate family members in 
a foreign country are of interest to a foreign power based on their prominence or personal 
situation. Rather, the issue is whether an applicant’s ties and contacts with immediate 
family members in a foreign country raise security [or trustworthiness] concerns because 
those ties and contacts create a potential vulnerability that a foreign power could seek to 
exploit in an effort to get unauthorized access to U.S. classified information that an 
applicant -- not the applicant’s immediate family members -- has by virtue of a security 
clearance [or public trust position]. A person may be vulnerable to influence or pressure 
exerted on, or through, the person’s immediate family members -- regardless of whether 
the person’s family members are prominent or not. 
 
13                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 02-22461, 2005 DOHA LEXIS 1570 at *11-*12 
(App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-26976 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 
2004)) (discussing Taiwan). 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives, criminals, or terrorists 
from or in Iraq or Jordan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or 
through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Iraq and Jordan have 
a significant problem with terrorism. Applicant’s family in Iraq and Jordan “could be a 
means through which Applicant comes to the attention of those who seek U.S. 
information or technology and who would attempt to exert coercion upon him.” ADP 
Case No. 14-01655 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-02950 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 14, 2015)).  
Applicant’s relationships with relatives who are living in Iraq and Jordan or 
visiting those countries create a potential conflict of interest because terrorists could 
place pressure on his family in Iraq and Jordan in an effort to cause Applicant to 
compromise classified information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships with family in Iraq 
and Jordan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
14                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for 
proving the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
AG ¶¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant has frequent contact with his relatives, who are 
citizens and residents of Jordan. He had frequent contacts with his step-siblings in Iraq 
until his father moved from Iraq to Jordan. The record does not establish that his spouse 
lacks frequent contacts with her mother in Iraq. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant 
resided in the United States from 2006 to 2016.9 In 2015, Applicant and his spouse 
became U.S. citizens. His spouse and children have lived in the United States since 
                                            
9 ISCR Case No. 17-00629 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018) the Appeal Board discussed a translator’s 
multiple tours on behalf of the United States in Iraq, limited time as a resident in the United States, and 
connections to family living in Iraq. The Appeal Board stated: 
     
In general, an applicant’s deployment to a combat zone in support of U.S. forces is not a 
factor that weighs against his or her national security eligibility. On the contrary, such 
deployments tend to establish various mitigating conditions such as [Directive] ¶ 8(b) 
(“there is no conflict of interest . . . because . . . the individual has such deep and 
longstanding loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest”); [Directive] ¶ 8(d) (“the foreign . . . 
activities are on U.S. Government business”); and [Directive] ¶ 8(f) (“the value or routine 
nature of the foreign business . . . is such that [it is] unlikely to result in a conflict of 
interest and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.”) 
 
Id. at 3 (internal footnotes omitted) (remanding administrative judge’s denial of security clearance). 
 
15                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
2010. He has a home and bank account in the United States. He was employed for one 
year on behalf of the United States as a linguist in Iraq. 
      
Applicant’s support to the DOD in Iraq as a linguist and cultural advisor, including 
the dangers that service entailed, weigh towards mitigating security concerns. Applicant 
seeks a security clearance to enable him to continue serving in Iraq providing critical 
assistance to U.S. Armed Forces in a dangerous combat environment. He has offered 
to continue to risk his life to support the United States’ goals in Iraq. He has shown his 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States during his support to DOD while 
serving in Iraq.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 17-00629 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018), the Appeal Board 
cogently explained the relevance of such service on behalf of the United States: 
 
Such evidence demonstrates that Applicant has repeatedly been willing to 
assume a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S. and shows his ties and 
sense of obligation to the U.S. could be sufficiently strong enough to 
support a favorable application of mitigating condition 8(b). See ISCR 
Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006) (An applicant’s work in 
support of U.S. forces in Afghanistan occurred “in the context of 
dangerous high-risk circumstances in which [he] made a significant 
contribution to national security.”) See also ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 
5, 2008); and ISCR Case No. 10-02803 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2012).  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens 
and residents of Iraq and Jordan. His father, several siblings, and his siblings’ families 
reside in Jordan. His spouse’s mother lives in Iraq. Like every other resident of Iraq and 
Jordan, they are at risk from criminals, terrorists, and human rights violations of those 
countries’ governments. 
 
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge historical investment of 
manpower and money in Iraq, and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in 
Iraq. Applicant and his family living in Iraq and Jordan are potential targets of terrorists, 
and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add risk to 
his relatives living in those countries from lawless elements in Iraq and Jordan.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Iraq and Jordan are less 
significant than his connections to the United States. His employment in support of the 
U.S. Government, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and U.S. citizenship 
are important factors weighing towards mitigation of security concerns. He has not 
traveled to Jordan since 2010, and he only traveled to Iraq once between 2006 and 
2017 to visit family. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
 
16                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 explains the security concern about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may provide 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States. Foreign involvement raises concerns about an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. 
national interests or when the individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the 
fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen of another country is not 
disqualifying without an objective showing of such conflict or attempt at 
concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise of any right or 
privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) applying for and/or acquiring citizenship in any other country; 
 
(b) failure to report, or fully disclose when required, to an appropriate 
security official, the possession of a passport or identity card issued by any 
country other than the United States; 
 
(c) failure to use a U.S. passport when entering or exiting the U.S.; 
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, 
position, or political office in a foreign government or military organization; 
and 
 
(2) otherwise acting to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in any way that conflicts with U.S. national 
security interests; 
 
(e) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country in violation of U.S. law; and 
 
(f) an act of expatriation from the United States such as declaration of 
intent to renounce U.S. citizenship, whether through words or actions. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists some examples that raise foreign preference concerns. In 2016, 
Applicant told an investigator that Iraq was “my country” and the United States was “my 
second country.” This statement of preference for Iraq raises a foreign preference 
security concern.    
 
 
17                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶ 11 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the foreign citizenship is not in conflict with U.S. national security 
interests; 
 
(b) dual citizenship is based solely on parental citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country, and there is no evidence of foreign preference; 
 
(c) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce the foreign 
citizenship that is in conflict with U.S. national security interests; 
 
(d) the exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen; 
 
(e) the exercise of the entitlements or benefits of foreign citizenship do not 
present a national security concern; 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or 
the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by U.S. 
law; and 
 
(h) any potentially disqualifying activity took place after receiving the 
approval by the agency head or designee. 
 
AG ¶ 11(c) applies. After serving with Special Operations personnel in Iraq, 
Applicant changed his views of the United States. He is more patriotic towards the 
United States and is willing to sacrifice for the United States. He credibly expressed a 
willingness to renounce his Iraq citizenship. His oath of allegiance contains a 
renouncement of foreign allegiance. He provided his Iraq passport to his security officer; 
it was subsequently destroyed. Foreign preference security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
18                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines B and C are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old linguist, and DOD contractors have employed him for 
one year in Iraq as a linguist. In 1996, he received a bachelor’s degree in Iraq. In 1999, 
he married, and his five daughters are ages 4, 9, 13, 15, and 17. His three oldest 
children were born in Iraq; his fourth child was born in Jordan; and his fifth child was 
born in the United States.    
 
Applicant has frequent contact with his family, who are residents of Jordan and 
until recently with his step-siblings in Iraq. His spouse’s mother is a citizen and resident 
of Iraq. Frequent contacts with family in foreign countries are a manifestation of one’s 
care and concern for relatives living in those foreign countries. There is no evidence that 
his relatives are Jordan or Iraq government employees or military personnel. His and his 
spouse’s relationships with residents of foreign countries raise important foreign 
influence security concerns, and they must be balanced against his connections to the 
United States.      
 
In 2006, Applicant and his spouse and children left Iraq and moved to Jordan. In 
2010, they moved to the United States. In 2015, Applicant and his spouse took the oath 
of allegiance and became U.S. citizens. He has not been to Jordan since 2010. After 
leaving Iraq in 2006, he returned to Iraq once in 2016 to visit family and for linguist 
duties in 2017.  
 
Applicant’s employer in Iraq and two Army captains described Applicant as 
professional, trustworthy, professional, diligent, and helpful. He provided important 
contributions to U.S. mission accomplishment in Iraq.  
 
Applicant served as a linguist, translator, or cultural advisor in Iraq. He made 
contributions at personal risk on behalf of U.S. combat forces in Iraq. All these 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report 
any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit 
him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). His past honorable 
service as a linguist weighs heavily towards mitigating of foreign influence security 
concerns. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (affirming grant of 
security clearance and commenting “Applicant has served as a translator and as a 
cultural liaison between Americans and Afghan citizens, diffusing tensions and 
facilitating transactions between the two groups. . . . . Applicant put his life in danger on 
at least one occasion to protect American lives and interests in Afghanistan.”). 
 
 
19                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq and Jordan must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation and dangers there.10 Those countries are dangerous places 
because of violence from terrorists, and their governments do not respect the full 
spectrum of human rights. Terrorists continue to threaten the Iraq and Jordan 
governments, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. The United States, Iraq, and Jordan 
governments are allies in the war on terrorism. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence and 
foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
10 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
