 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     -------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02605 
      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bruce R. Heurlin, Esq.   
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain and 
mitigate his self-reported history of drug involvement and substance misuse. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 21, 2017.1 This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on August 30, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline H for drug involvement and 
substance misuse and Guideline E for personal conduct (a single cross-allegation to the 
sale of marijuana alleged under Guideline H).  
 
With assistance of counsel, Applicant submitted a comprehensive answer to the 
SOR on October 27, 2017. He admitted the SOR allegations; he provided an extensive 
explanation as outlined in a ten-page memorandum, to include supporting 
documentation marked as Exhibits A - EE; and he requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.   
 
The case was assigned to me on November 27, 2017. The hearing was 
conducted as scheduled on April 11, 2018. At the start of the hearing, Department 
Counsel withdrew the SOR allegation under Guideline E for personal conduct.2 
Accordingly, that matter will not be discussed further. Both Department Counsel and 
Applicant offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Government Exhibits 1 
and 2 and Applicant’s Exhibits A - HH. The hearing transcript was received on April 19, 
2018.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his 
employment with a large company doing business in the defense industry. He is 
employed as an export license and compliance specialist with an annual income of 
about $65,000. He has been so employed since December 2016. This is his initial 
application for a security clearance. He has never married and has no children.   
 
Applicant was a successful student and athlete in high school, finishing in the top 
20% of his graduating class in 2007.3 He then attended college and graduated with a 
3.51/4.0 GPA, with a bachelor’s degree in political science in 2011; he also earned 
certificates in classical studies and European studies.4 While in college, he participated 
in a foreign policy study trip to two European countries, he was recommended for a 
fellowship in international affairs, and he published a scholarly article in a journal for 
international studies.5 He continued his studies during 2012-2014 by pursuing a 
graduate degree at a university in our Nation’s capital. He graduated in December 2014 
with a 3.74/4.0 GPA, with a master’s degree in international affairs with a specialization 
in international politics.6 During his master’s program, he was awarded a $3,500 
scholarship from a foundation, he presented a paper to a conference on international 
                                                          
2 Tr. 9-10.  
 
3 Exhibits B1, C, and D.  
 
4 Exhibit H.  
 
5 Exhibits E, F, and G.  
 
6 Exhibit M.  
 
 
3 
 
studies, and he contributed to an intelligence analysis practicum delivered to a federal 
intelligence agency as part of his capstone (thesis) project.7 He had a difficult time 
finding employment in his field of studies or his areas of interest. As a result, he worked 
as a researcher and office manager for a law office of a solo practitioner from May 2013 
to September 2016. He then worked for a few months as a writer and editor for a federal 
contractor until he began his current employment.   
 
Applicant has a history of drug involvement and substance misuse, which he 
does not dispute. Most but not all of his substance misuse occurred when he was a 
student. He self-reported this adverse information in his February 2017 security 
clearance application.8 He then provided further information when he was interviewed 
during the course of his 2017 background investigation.9 In particular, he disclosed the 
following concerning his illegal use of drugs or drug activity in response to Section 23 of 
the application:  
 
• Using marijuana (“smoked pot with friends and classmates”) beginning in about 
July 2003 and ending in about July 2016. His reported use started in high school 
and college, usually in recreational or social settings, and occurred once in the 
last two years or so. 
• Using cocaine on a few occasions over a ten-year-period beginning in about July 
2006 and ending in about July 2016. His reported use occurred during 
celebratory or party events (e.g., weddings, concert, etc.) maybe a dozen times. 
• Using LSD and mushrooms a few times beginning in about May 2008 and ending 
in about July 2016. His reported use was less than ten times. 
• Selling marijuana (“sold a little bit of weed in high school and college”) beginning 
in about April 2007 and ending in about July 2012. He described the activity as “a 
low volume of infrequent transactions mostly involving his friends.” 
• Misusing two prescription drugs on occasion for sports, as a study aid, or to stay 
awake during long drives beginning in about August 2006 and ending in about 
May 2016. 
• Throughout his responses to the questions in Section 23, he stated that he 
intends to abstain from all illegal use or misuse of drugs, that he values his 
career and a drug-free lifestyle, and he desires to practice his hobbies and build 
relationships in a drug-free context.  
 
At the hearing, I found his hearing testimony to be credible and worthy of belief. I 
also found him to be an intense, serious young man.10 At the beginning of his testimony, 
he described his behavior as “very regrettable” and acknowledged that his behavior was 
a cause of concern. Under a thorough cross-examination, he provided further details or 
                                                          
7 Exhibits I, J, and K.  
 
8 Exhibit 1.  
 
9 Exhibit 2.  
 
10 Tr. 81-82.  
 
 
4 
 
clarification or both about his illegal drug involvement as alleged in the SOR.11 Each 
SOR allegation is discussed below in light of the cross-examination.  
 
Applicant explained that his use of LSD and mushrooms together occurred eight 
to ten times, which includes using LSD about three times, the last usage occurring in 
July 2016 and the other two uses taking place about ten years ago. His mushroom use 
occurred about four or five times during 2008-2010 while he was an undergraduate 
student.  
 
Applicant explained that he began using marijuana sometime when he was in 
high school, and his usage continued until the last incident in July 2016. He was unable 
to estimate the frequency of his marijuana use, but described it as varying, intermittent, 
and perhaps monthly during his student years. He did not use marijuana alone and 
always used it in some sort of social setting. He also recalls smoking marijuana 
approximately six times during 2012-2016, as the frequency decreased after his 
undergraduate studies. 
 
Concerning cocaine, Applicant explained that he used it on a few occasions, less 
than a dozen, during 2006-2016. The last time was July 2016, and the second to last 
time was in 2014 during an overseas trip. His use of cocaine occurred during social 
events or vacation. 
 
Applicant explained that he misused the two prescription drugs, which he viewed 
as probably interchangeable, less than 20 times during 2006-2016, with the last misuse 
taking place in about May 2016 during a long driving trip. He misused the drugs for the 
purpose of increasing his focus during certain activities. He never bought the drugs, but 
obtained them when a friend would give the pill to him.  
 
Concerning the sale of marijuana, Applicant explained that this was an on-again, 
off-again activity during 2007-2012. He recalls the frequency was at a high point in early 
2007 during his senior year in high school. The frequency decreased when he went 
away to college because he did not know anyone there. He would sell again when he 
was home over the summer. He would typically buy an ounce of marijuana, which would 
be enough for him to use a couple of times and then sell a couple of very small amounts 
to his friends for $5 or $10 to offset his own costs.   
 
Applicant also explained that he no longer associates with his two cousins with 
whom he primarily used drugs. He now sees them once or twice a year when he travels 
cross-country for a holiday visit with his family. His cousins have not visited him in his 
current location. He explained that his parents do not want him to associate with the two 
cousins or even speak to them. His parents and larger family are aware that he is going 
through the security-clearance process and they support him in his efforts to 
disassociate from his two cousins. He does not associate with drug-using people in his 
current location, he has friends both at work and outside of work, he plays sports, and 
he’s involved in a local church, all of which makes up a drug-free social network for him.  
                                                          
11 Tr. 44-74.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant also addressed the circumstances surrounding his last use of illegal 
drugs—consisting of marijuana, cocaine, and LSD on a single occasion in July 2016. He 
had previously made a conscious decision to abstain and had done so since about 
December 2014, because he knew a drug-free lifestyle was necessary for his desired 
employment with the federal government or a federal contractor. He explained that he 
used the three illegal drugs at a July 4th party because he felt he was at a low point in 
his life, probably depressed and certainly frustrated with the difficulty he experienced in 
finding a suitable job. He used drugs that were available at the party, he did not go out 
and buy them. He woke up the next day and was very unhappy with himself and his 
failure in discipline, because this event in effect required him to restart the clock on his 
drug-free lifestyle. He attributes his misconduct to feeling like his spirit was crushed due 
to prolonged job-hunting frustration and he lapsed into juvenile, unlawful behavior. 
Regretting his behavior, he decided to “double down” on his drug-free behavior and 
“double down” on seeking suitable employment, which paid off a few months later when 
he was called for an interview by his current employer.12  
 
Applicant successfully completed a pre-employment drug test for his current job. 
At the hearing, he restated his intention to abstain from all illegal drug use and misuse 
of prescription drugs. To that end, he submitted a signed statement of intent to abstain 
from all drug involvement and substance misuse in the future, and he understands that 
any future involvement is grounds for revocation of eligibility.13 He understands and was 
able to articulate the security concern associated with his drug misconduct, and he 
explained that it was important for him to be truthful during the security-clearance 
process.14 
 
In addition to the pre-employment drug test noted above, Applicant voluntarily 
took a drug test in December 2017, and he tested negative for all tested substances.15 
He also voluntarily submitted to a substance-abuse evaluation in December 2017, 
conducted by a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW), a licensed independent 
substance abuse counselor (LISAC), and a licensed clinical supervisor with 20 years of 
experience in her field.16 The evaluation of Applicant reached a diagnostic assessment 
of substance use disorder not present; he did not meet any criteria for substance use 
related disorder; he self-reported what appears to be a history of situational or social 
substance misuse; no treatment was recommended; and the overall prognosis was 
assessed as good.    
                                                          
12 Tr. 82-84.  
 
13 Exhibit A; Tr. 40-41.   
 
14 Tr. 22-23.  
 
15 Exhibit GG.  
 
16 Exhibit HH.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant presented extensive documentary evidence in mitigation.17 The 
documentation consists of 12 letters of recommendation, two certificates of job training, 
two certificates of achievement related to job training, and seven achievement or spot 
awards from his current employer. Taken together, the documentary evidence shows 
that Applicant is known as a dedicated, devoted, ethical, loyal, hard-working, reliable, 
and trustworthy person who has good judgment. The documentation of his job training 
and achievement awards attest to a good employment record for a relatively new 
employee.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.18 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.19 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”20 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.21 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.22 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.23 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.24 
                                                          
17 Exhibits L-FF.  
 
18 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
20 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
21 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
23 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
24 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
7 
 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.25 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.26 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.27 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.28 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline H for drug involvement and substance misuse, the concern is 
that: 
 
[t]he illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescriptions and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are use in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose, can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. . .29 
 
 In addition to the above matters, I note that the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued an October 25, 2014 memorandum concerning adherence to federal laws 
prohibiting marijuana use. In doing so, the DNI emphasized three things. First, no state 
can authorize violations of federal law, including violations of the Controlled Substances 
Act, which identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled drug. Second, changes to 
state laws (and the laws of the District of Columbia) concerning marijuana use do not 
alter the national security adjudicative guidelines. And third, a person’s disregard of 
federal law concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains relevant 
when making eligibility decisions for sensitive national security positions.  
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) any substance misuse; 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
25 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
26 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
27 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
28 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
29 AG ¶ 24.  
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds of revocation of national security eligibility. 
  
 I have considered the totality of Applicant’s drug involvement and substance 
misuse from its inception in 2003 (marijuana use) until the last occurrence in July 2016 
when he used marijuana, cocaine, and LSD at a party. Any illegal drug use is relevant in 
the context of evaluating a person’s security worthiness, but it becomes more relevant 
(and more of a concern) depending on the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct. Here, we have a case where Applicant’s substance misuse occurred for the 
most part when he was a student, in high school, college, or graduate school, which he 
completed in December 2014. He then abstained for a period of about 16 months until 
he misused the prescription drug in May 2016, and he then lapsed again at the July 4th 
party in 2016. The last incident in July 2016 predates his security clearance application 
by about eight months and predates the hearing by about 21 months. His substance 
misuse involved different drugs over a period of years, and it went beyond mere 
youthful experimentation on a few occasions. And his drug involvement included the 
possession and sale of marijuana, although this was not a money-making activity. It was 
a low-level activity done to offset his own costs for the marijuana. Taken together, the 
nature, extent, and seriousness of his drug involvement and substance misuse raise 
valid concerns under the disqualifying conditions mentioned above. Indeed, this case is 
at or near my full level of tolerance for a favorable decision in a drug case.  
 
 In mitigation, Applicant provided sufficient evidence in reform and rehabilitation to 
persuade me that he is an acceptable security risk. I reached that conclusion for the 
following reasons: (1) his drug involvement and substance misuse ended with the last 
incident in July 2016, about 21 months before the record closed in this case, which is 
considered not recent; (2) he self-reported and disclosed his drug involvement and 
substance misuse use throughout the security-clearance process; (3) he gave full, 
frank, and candid answers to all questions asked during the hearing, and he expressed 
a good understanding of the security concern; (4) he presented affirmative, 
documentary evidence from reliable sources that he is no longer using illegal drugs and 
does not have a substance-abuse problem; (5) he pledged in a signed statement of 
 
9 
 
intent that he will no longer engage in substance abuse and he understands the 
consequences should he violate his pledge; (6) his record of success in higher 
education, a good employment record with his current defense-contractor employer, 
and the highly favorable letters of recommendation also speak well for him; and (7) he 
appears to be in a stable, structured work environment in which he enjoys and excels, 
and I’m persuaded that he has no intention of putting his job in jeopardy.  
 
 In particular, I was impressed by Applicant’s willingness to self-report the totality 
of his drug involvement and substance misuse. He was candid at every step of the 
security-clearance process, and he took ownership of his past drug-related misconduct. 
His willingness to do so strongly suggests he will report any potential security infraction 
or violation committed by himself or his co-workers, which is exactly what is expected of 
every applicant. Overall, I am persuaded that Applicant’s drug involvement and 
substance misuse are safely in the past, that he is no longer involved with people who 
are involved with illegal drugs, and that he will adhere to a drug-free lifestyle in the 
foreseeable future.    
    
 Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighted the 
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the 
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I 
conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Withdrawn   
Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn  
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility is granted.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
