 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 17-04198 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement and substance misuse). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and H. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 9, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 22, 2018, scheduling the 
hearing for July 11, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, 
which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to 
 
2 
 
submit additional information. He submitted AE L through N, which were admitted 
without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 2004 until he was honorably discharged in 2011. He seeks to retain a security 
clearance, which he has held with some breaks since 2004. He has a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in 2014, and a master’s degree, which was awarded in 
2016. He has never married, and he has no children.1 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana regularly before he joined the military. He smoked 
marijuana once while he was in the military in 2005. He did not use marijuana again 
while in the military. He resumed smoking marijuana after his discharge, including while 
holding a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant reported his marijuana use on Questionnaires for National Security 
Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in March and August 2014. He wrote that 
between December 2011 and August 2013 he used marijuana “[n]o more than 10 times 
total.” He wrote that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future, noting: “[d]rug use 
is not conducive to government or clearance employment. My ideal job and clearance 
level do not tolerate further use.” Applicant’s marijuana use included while he was 
working in Afghanistan and when he was in Amsterdam. He reiterated his intent to 
refrain from illegal drug use during background interviews in May and October 2014.3 
 
In November 2015, Applicant ate food (marijuana edibles) that he knew 
contained marijuana. He smoked marijuana in January 2016. He reported his marijuana 
use on his April 2016 SF 86, and he discussed it during his background interview in 
March 2017. He told the investigator that he liked marijuana more than alcohol, and he 
would have continued smoking marijuana if it was permitted at his current job and he 
did not have a security clearance.4 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since January 2016. He stated that he has 
matured and realizes that his past marijuana use was unacceptable. He testified that he 
will never use illegal drugs again. He avoids individuals who use drugs and places 
where drugs are used. He signed a statement of intent not to use any illegal drugs in the 
future, with an acknowledgement that any future illegal drug use would be grounds to 
revoke his national security eligibility.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 41-43, 81-82; GE 1-4; AE A-E.  
 
2 Tr. at 44-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4.  
 
3 Tr. at 50-54; GE 2-4.  
 
4 Tr. at 52-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4.  
 
5 Tr. at 57-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H, I, L-N.  
 
3 
 
Applicant deployed while in the military and for his civilian job. Two witnesses 
testified, and he submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent job 
performance in the military and in his civilian job. He is praised for his honesty, moral 
character, work ethic, trustworthiness, leadership, dedication, honor, judgment, and 
integrity. He is recommended for a security clearance. In contrast to the strong 
character evidence, Applicant was arrested and subsequently convicted for alcohol-
related driving offenses in 2011 and 2014.6  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 13-40, 43; GE 1-4; AE C, F, G, J. The alcohol-related driving offenses were not alleged in the 
SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered to place Applicant’s 
character evidence in context, in the application of mitigating conditions, and when conducting the whole-
person analysis. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24:   
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant possessed and smoked marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
The above disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since January 2016. He stated that he has 
matured and realizes that his past marijuana use was unacceptable, and that he will 
never use illegal drugs again. He signed a statement of intent not to use any illegal 
drugs in the future, with an acknowledgement that any future illegal drug use would be 
grounds to revoke his national security eligibility. I found Applicant to be honest and 
credible. However, I also believe he was sincere in 2014 when he stated that he would 
not use illegal drugs again, and then did so. Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His well-established pattern of 
illegal drug use is not mitigated. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable, and AG ¶ 26(b) is partially 
applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
6 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing;  
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in 
that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while 
legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use is cross-alleged under Guideline E. That 
conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 
16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s conduct is 
sufficient for an adverse determination under the drug involvement and substance 
misuse guideline. However, the general concerns about questionable judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are 
established.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
7 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs since January 2016. The discussion above 
under drug involvement and substance misuse applies equally here. Applicant is 
commended for his honesty, which reduces his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress.  Nonetheless, the conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Personal conduct security 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and H in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
honorable military service and strong character evidence, which is somewhat countered 
by his arrests and subsequent convictions for alcohol-related driving offenses in 2011 
and 2014. 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E and H. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
