1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 17-02779 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Given the recency of Applicant’s marijuana usage, it is too soon to conclude that she 
has mitigated the drug involvement security concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 11, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guidelines H, drug involvement, and E, personal conduct, 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
security clearance eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, effective June 8, 2017. 
 
On August 18, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting subparagraphs 1.a 
and 1.b, and denying subparagraph 2.a. She requested a hearing, whereupon the case 
was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. On June 5, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings 
 
2 
 
and Appeals issued a notice of hearing, scheduling Applicant’s case for July 11, 2018. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. I received two Government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 2). The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old single woman. She graduated from college in 2014, 
majoring in exercise science, and has been working for a defense contractor as an 
associate programmer since 2016. (Tr. 11) This is her first application for a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying degrees of frequency beginning in 2013 while 
in college to September 2017. (Answer at 1) At the hearing, she attributes her decision to 
begin smoking marijuana to peer pressure and her relationship with a “cruel and 
manipulative” boyfriend. (Tr. 15) She continued using it for three years after college 
because it helped her relax and helped increase her appetite. (GE 1 at 34) 
 
 Applicant disclosed her marijuana use on her security clearance application in May 
2016, vowing not to use it again. Despite this pledge, she used it again during the period 
after completing the application and before her subject interview in September 2017.  (Tr. 
16) She disclosed this use to the investigator, and again promised not to use marijuana in 
the future. (GE 2) She has not used marijuana since September 2017. Applicant attributes 
her recurrence to her continued association with the “poisonous people” with whom she 
met in college. (Tr. 16) She has not associated with them since October 2017. (Tr. 16) She 
has no intention to use marijuana in the future. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
3 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concerns about drug involvement are set forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of marijuana use triggers the application of AG ¶ 25(a), “any 
substance misuse.” If Applicant’s marijuana use was limited to when she was in college, it 
could perhaps be attributed to youthful immaturity. However, Applicant’s marijuana use 
continued for three years after college, through September 2017, and most importantly, 
continued after she disclosed it on her security clearance application and promised to stop 
using it. Under these circumstances, she has not established a pattern of abstinence to 
apply any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information.” Applicant’s history of marijuana use is disqualifying under the personal 
conduct guideline for the same reasons it is disqualifying under the drug involvement 
guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Given Applicant’s history of marijuana use and its recency, it is too soon to conclude 
that she has mitigated the security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideilne E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
 Administrative Judge 
