KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s findings are supported by substantial evidence, that is, “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.” Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-02145.a1
DATE: 09/10/2018
DATE: September 10, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02145
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
28, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 22, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is employed by a Defense contractor.  He has previously served in the military,
retiring in 2006.  He has held a clearance since at least 1994.  Applicant’s SOR lists three delinquent
debts.  The first is based upon a car loan that he co-signed for his daughter, who became unable to
make payments after a divorce.  Applicant told his clearance interviewer that he recognized his
liability as a co-signer but that he did not intend to pay the debt.  At the hearing he denied making
this statement.  After the hearing he submitted a statement to the effect that Applicant’s daughter
and ex-husband had refinanced the car, but he provided no corroboration for this assertion.
Applicant  had a $675 medical debt that he believed his insurance company should have
paid, but he paid it himself in early 2017.  He also claimed that a small debt to a book club had been
paid in full, although he provided no documentation in support.
In 2016, Applicant plugged a personal activity tracker into his work computer, which was
virtually identical to his personal one.  The activity tracker was not authorized, and his work
computer locked up, sending an electronic message to security officials.  No classified information
was compromised.  Applicant’s employer suspended his access to classified information pending
an investigation.  The Government client whom Applicant’s job supported requested that he be
removed from the contract because he could not perform work with a suspended clearance. 
Therefore, Applicant’s employer terminated him.  Although the employer offered to rehire him,
Applicant had taken his current job and did not accept the offer.
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not disclose his
delinquent automobile loan, medical debt, or debt to the book club.  In his Answer to the SOR, he
acknowledged that he had responded to the questions incorrectly but stated that this was due to haste
in completing his SCA.  He also failed to disclose his having been fired from his previous
employment.  He stated that he had left the job because it was temporary, although in his Answer
to the SOR he stated that he had quit by mutual agreement because of a motorcycle injury.
Applicant’s current income is about $145,000.  He has about $10,000 in savings and about
$40,000 in a retirement account.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant is financially secure and able to pay his debts.  He has
provided no documentation to show that the largest, the car loan, has been resolved.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s debts are recent and numerous.  He also concluded that, although the car
loan delinquency resulted from his daughter’s divorce, he had not demonstrated responsible action,
nor has he provided documentary evidence to show that this debt has been resolved.  Regarding
Guideline E, the Judge found that Applicant was aware of the car loan debt but that he felt no
responsibility to resolve it.  He found Applicant’s explanation for his omission of this debt to be
unconvincing and noted that Applicant is educated and has been through the clearance process
enough times to understand in the importance of accuracy and candor.  The Judge stated that
Applicant did not admit this debt until he had been confronted with evidence by his interviewer.  He
also cited to inconsistent statements that Applicant made concerning his omission of the job
termination.  He concluded that these omissions were not minor and did not occur under unusual
circumstances.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that his omissions from his SCA were not deliberate.  When evaluating
the deliberate nature of an applicant’s omissions or false statements, a Judge should consider the
applicant’s mens rea in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
08163 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 25, 2017). 
In the case before us, viewing the challenged findings in light of the record as a whole, we
conclude that they are sustainable.  The Judge cited to statements that Applicant made during the
processing of his SCA that were not consistent among themselves, and inconsistent statements can
impugn a witness’s credibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03778 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2017). 
Moreover, the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s education and his experience in undergoing
security investigations support a conclusion that Applicant understood the need for complete
truthfulness, thereby lessening the chance that he acted through mere haste, ignorance, or
inexperience.  The Judge’s findings are supported by substantial evidence, that is, “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 17-00506
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).
The balance of Applicant’s appeal brief is an argument that the Judge did not consider all
of the evidence in the record or that he mis-weighed the evidence.  However, Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has he
shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).  We give due consideration
to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited.   However, Hearing Office decisions are binding
neither on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  Each case must be decided on its
own merits.  Id.         
3
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
