 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-03230 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not file several years of annual state and federal income tax returns 
on time, as required. These late filings were largely due to conditions beyond his 
control, including a nonresponsive accountant. Under the circumstances, Applicant 
undertook responsible, good-faith efforts to remediate the problem by hiring a second, 
better qualified accountant, who prepared and filed his past-due tax returns, and by 
keeping his employer informed. Applicant’s tax filing issues are unlikely to recur, and no 
longer cast doubt on his current judgment, trustworthiness and reliability. Applicant 
provided sufficient evidence to mitigate financial security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 25, 2016. On 
October 5, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
 
2 
 
 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), 
effective June 8, 2017.  
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on October 25, 2017, and requested an 
administrative (written) decision in lieu of a hearing. He also included four groups of 
documents (Attachments (Att.) 1 through 4), which are also included in the record.1 On 
November 27, 2017, Department Counsel requested a hearing, under ¶ E3.1.7 of the 
Directive. The case was assigned to me on February 16, 2018. On March 23, 2018, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 25, 2018.  
 
The hearing convened as scheduled. At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 and GE 2 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE I, which were admitted without objection. The 
record closed on the date of the hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript on May 
4, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant partially admitted and partially denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with 
explanations and documents. His admissions and explanations are incorporated into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He and his wife have been married since 2011. They 
have one child. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007, and a master’s degree in 
December 2017. (GE 1) He has held various positions in the defense industry, with a 
security clearance, since February 2011. He has worked for his current employer, a 
large defense contractor, since June 2017. (Tr. 12-13; 50-52; GE 1) His wife runs her 
own publishing and consulting business out of their home. (Answer; Att. 1) 
 
 In SOR ¶ 1.a, the Government alleged that Applicant had failed to file Federal 
taxes (tax returns) for tax years 2011-2015, as required, and that they remained unfiled 
as of the date of the SOR. Applicant admitted that all those tax returns had been filed 
late. He stated that returns for tax years 2011-2013 had been filed by the date of the 
SOR, but acknowledged that returns for tax years 2014 and 2015 remained unfiled. 
(Answer)  
 
In SOR ¶ 1.b, the Government alleged that Applicant had failed to file his state 
taxes (tax returns) for tax years 2007, 2008, 2013 and 2015, as required, and that those 
tax returns remained unfiled as of the date of the SOR. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.b 
for all years except 2007. (Answer) 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 42-44.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Federal income tax returns are generally due on or before April 15 of the year 
following the tax year at issue.2 The state income tax return filing deadline for 
Applicant’s home state is generally May 1 of the following year.3 
 
 When Applicant married his wife, he learned that she had outstanding tax issues 
and unfiled tax returns from her prior marriage, which ended in 2010. He testified that 
his wife’s first husband had failed to file their joint tax returns between about 2007 and 
2010. (Tr. 48, 78; Answer) When Applicant learned this, they hired an accountant. The 
accountant filed his wife’s past due returns in 2011. (Answer; Tr. 78-81) 
 
 As a result, Applicant’s wife owed an estimated $30,000 to $40,000 in past-due 
taxes (perhaps jointly with her former husband). This was because she had sold some 
stock and withdrawn money from an individual retirement account. Applicant testified 
that he did not want to be responsible for the tax debt his wife brought into their 
marriage, in part because of the possible impact on his security clearance. (Tr. 79-81).  
 
Applicant’s wife and her first husband jointly owned a house in another state. The 
husband was to sell the house within five years of the divorce, in 2010. He did not do 
so. (Tr. 82-83) On their accountant’s recommendation, Applicant and his wife intended 
to sell that house and use the proceeds to pay his wife’s past-due tax debt. (Tr. 84) 
They later learned that the house had been abandoned. The accountant surmised that 
the IRS might claim that Applicant’s wife therefore had no assets. Thus, Applicant’s own 
assets (or their joint marital assets) were potentially vulnerable to satisfy his wife’s tax 
debt. (Tr. 81-82; Answer) The home in State 2 is now in foreclosure. (Tr. 83) Applicant 
testified that his wife’s past-due tax debt has yet to be resolved. (Tr. 55-60, 81-83) Since 
2011, Applicant has filed as an “injured spouse,” to protect refunds that the IRS might 
otherwise keep to pay his wife’s past-due taxes from prior years. (Answer, Att. 1. Tr. 79-
80, 82) 
 
Applicant’s accountant prepared and filed their 2011 federal and state income tax 
returns in April 2012. These returns were filed on time, contrary to SOR ¶ 1.a. Their 
accountant filed their 2012 and 2013 state and federal income tax returns in March 
2015. (Ans. Att. 1; Att. 4; Tr. 66) All of these returns reflect refunds.  
 
Applicant testified that his accountant told him she was a certified public 
accountant (CPA) with 30 years of experience. “She stated that I had 3 years to file and 
I believed her . . .”. (Answer; Tr. 48-49) When asked at hearing why he did not file his 
tax returns on time every year, as required, Applicant said he followed his accountant’s 
professional advice, which was that he had three years to file his tax returns if he did not 
owe anything in taxes. Applicant acknowledged, however, that he knew his tax returns 
were late. (Tr. 64) 
 
                                                          
2 See https://www.irs.gov/filing/individuals/when-to-file.  
 
3 See https://tax.[Name of Applicant’s home state].gov/when-to-file.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant also said their accountant had filed the required extensions. He never 
received any corroborating documentation from her. (Answer; Tr. 64-65) Applicant also 
acknowledged that he later learned (from his current accountant) that the advice he 
received from the first accountant’s was wrong, and that, “it doesn’t matter if you owe or 
not, you have three years to get a refund, but you still have to file.” (Tr. 57) 
 
 Applicant testified that he and his wife gave their first accountant power of 
attorney to deal with the IRS on their behalf. After that, they no longer received any 
letters from the IRS. Applicant therefore believed that his taxes were being handled 
properly by the accountant. (Tr. 80-81; Answer)  
 
 At some point in either 2016, Applicant’s accountant became non-responsive. In 
his Answer, Applicant said, “When I filled out the SF-86, I was trying to get my 
paperwork back from [the accountant] so [I] put her down as the person responsible for 
knowing about my tax situation. (Answer at 2; GE 1 at 35-36) He testified that he lost 
contact with her “right after I finished filing the e-QIP,” in May 2016. (Tr. 65) 
 
 Applicant testified that he attempted to reach his accountant on numerous 
occasions. Sometimes he heard back by voicemail but was never able to establish 
direct contact. At some point, he got no response by either phone or e-mail.4 His wife 
drove by the accountant’s office several times, but she was never there. (Tr. 68-69) He 
became worried because he was in the process of preparing his SCA, and knew his 
clearance might be affected. (Tr. 57, 58, 68, 87) He later learned that his current 
accountant was unable to verify the first accountant’s credentials. (Tr. 74; Answer)  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his May 2016 SCA that his 2014 and 2015 state and 
Federal income tax returns remained unfiled. He provided contact information for his 
first accountant, stated that she was working with the IRS and that he would file his 
returns and pay whatever taxes were owed. (GE 1 at 35-36)  
 
Applicant did not disclose on his SCA that he had also failed to timely file his tax 
returns for tax years 2011, 2012, and 2013. (GE 1; GE 2 at 3) At hearing, he testified 
that he did not report those returns as having been filed late because they had been 
filed by the time he submitted his SCA. He recognized, in hindsight, that the plain 
language of the questions called for disclosure of all late-filed tax returns in the last 
seven years. (Tr. 53-54) 
 
Applicant also did not file his 2016 income tax returns on time, though this was 
again largely due to his first accountant’s non-responsiveness. (Tr. 68-69) Applicant’s 
background interview was on March 15, 2017. (GE 2) This was one month before the 
April 15 federal tax filing deadline, and six weeks before the May 1 state filing deadline 
                                                          
4 APPLICANT: “And at that same time, I was trying to say, I don’t care if you are working on them, I want 
my paperwork back. And that is the messages that I kept leaving her, I want my paperwork, so I can give 
it to someone else to do it properly.” (Tr. 68) 
 
 
5 
 
 
for tax year 2016.5 He said in his interview that he was “working with a CPA,” though in 
fact he had had no contact with his first accountant for some time. (GE 2)  
 
At some point during this period, having lost contact with his first accountant, 
Applicant began seeking other options. Applicant began contacting other accountants 
for assistance, but found many of them too expensive. (Tr. 60) Applicant was 
hospitalized unexpectedly and missed several weeks of work in mid-2016. His wife was 
also hospitalized for a time in 2017, circumstances which took precedence over his tax 
issues. (Tr. 88-90; Answer; Att. 3). Applicant kept his employer and his facility security 
officer apprised of his tax status. (Tr. 50-54; GE 1; Answer) Ultimately, this led Applicant 
to his second accountant, the wife of one of Applicant’s supervisors. (Tr. 69-70)  
 
Applicant and his wife retained this second accountant, a CPA, in July 2017. 
(Answer, Att. 2; AE F; AE J) The second accountant was more responsive, and 
Applicant quickly gained confidence in her ability to help him. (Tr. 70-72) Applicant gave 
her power of attorney and authority to request his prior state and Federal tax returns in 
October 2017. The new accountant expected to finish preparing Applicant’s past-due 
tax returns by November 2017, but was delayed when she became ill. (Answer at p. 3; 
Att. 2) 
 
It also took some time for Applicant to gather proper records for his new 
accountant to review. Applicant acknowledged that he did not keep good records. In 
part, this was because Applicant had given his tax records to the first accountant, and 
never got them back. (Tr. 60, 86, 88-90) 
 
By April 2018, Applicant’s second accountant had prepared all the state and 
Federal income tax returns that were then outstanding. This included returns for tax 
years 2014, 2015, and 2016 (AE D, AE C, AE B, respectively).6 These returns were all 
filed by either Applicant or the CPA. (AE G) Applicant’s second accountant also 
prepared their 2017 state and Federal income tax returns. They were filed on time, in 
April 2018. (AE A, AE F, AE I) All of these returns reflect that Applicant and his wife 
were due refunds.  
 
 The second accountant’s review revealed that Applicant’s 2008 state and 
Federal income tax returns were also unfiled.7 Applicant described this as a “curveball” 
he did not expect, since he thought he had filed that year. 2008 was the first full tax year 
after Applicant graduated from college, a time when he would have wanted whatever 
refund came his way. (Tr. 54-55) His 2008 returns were also prepared and filed, in April 
                                                          
5 See footnotes 2 & 3, above.  
 
6 Applicant did not initially provide documentation that his tax returns for 2015, 2016 and 2017 had in fact 
been filed. He provided that documentation during the hearing, and it was added to AE A, AE B, and AE 
C. (Tr. 91-95) 
 
7 For tax year 2008, only the state return was alleged as having been filed late. (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
  
 
6 
 
 
2018. (AE G). Applicant did not have to file a tax return in 2007, (the year he graduated 
from college) because he did not earn enough income. (AE G; Answer Attachment 4)  
  
 Applicant has full confidence in his second accountant’s professional expertise 
and advice. He intends to continue working with her to insure that his tax returns are 
properly prepared and timely filed in the future. (Tr. 76-77) 
 
One of Applicant’s supervisors, a retired Air Force Lt. Colonel, submitted a 
recommendation letter. He has worked with Applicant since 2015. He considers 
Applicant a master in his craft, “agile on [his] feet” and having sound judgment. He has 
been vigilant in protecting network security. Applicant is younger than most who hold his 
position, but has proven trustworthy and dependable. Applicant has made his 
supervisor aware of matters in his personal life that could affect him professionally. He 
“has consistently guarded his integrity and sought to mitigate anything that presented a 
real or apparent challenge to it.” (AE H) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”8 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
8 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
7 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations security concern is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The guideline sets forth several conditions that could raise security concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following is applicable:  
 
(f) failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant established that he did not earn enough income to require filing a state 
income tax return for tax year 2007, the year he graduated college. He documented that 
his 2011 state income tax return was timely prepared and filed by his first accountant.9  
AG ¶ 19(f) is not established as to those returns. 
 
                                                          
9 Applicant’s 2011 Federal income tax return, also timely filed, was not alleged.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The allegations in the SOR are otherwise established. Applicant failed to timely 
file his annual Federal income tax returns for tax years 2012-2015. (SOR ¶ 1.a) He 
failed to timely file his state income tax returns for tax years 2008, 2013, and 2015. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) AG ¶ 19(f) applies to those tax returns.10 
  
 Applicant had a duty to file his annual state and Federal income tax returns in a 
timely manner, and the fact that he did not do so for several years is a security concern. 
As the Appeal Board has long held:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2002). As we have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is 
not directed at collecting debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No, 07-08049 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By the same token, neither is it directed towards 
inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the 
high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted 
access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015); See Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union 
Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 
886 (1961).11 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
                                                          
10 Applicant also failed to timely file several other income tax returns during the tax years at issue that 
were not alleged. This includes his 2008 Federal return, and his state returns for tax years 2012 and 
2014, as well as his state and Federal income tax returns for tax year 2016. I cannot consider these 
returns as disqualifying conduct, since they were not alleged in the SOR. However, I can consider them in 
weighing mitigation or changed circumstances, whether Applicant has demonstrated sufficient 
rehabilitation, under the whole person concept, and in weighing Applicant’s credibility. ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016) (emphasis added). See ISCR Case No. 14-
05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). 
  
 
9 
 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
Applicant’s wife had significant unresolved tax issues remaining from her first 
marriage. When Applicant learned this after they married in 2011, he hired an 
accountant. The accountant filed his wife’s past-due returns in 2011. Applicant’s wife 
owed between $30,000 and $40,000 in past-due taxes, tax debt likely caused by stock 
sales and withdrawing funds from an IRA during the first marriage.  
 
Applicant was rightly concerned about the security implications of this debt for his 
own clearance. He sought to separate his wife’s tax issues from his own. Applicant and 
his wife hoped to sell her prior marital home and use the proceeds to resolve her tax 
debts. To give Applicant and his wife time to sort that out, his first accountant, who 
represented herself to him as a CPA with 30 years’ experience, told Applicant he had 
three years after the annual deadline to file his federal income tax returns if he was due 
a refund. This was bad advice, as he later learned. As the Appeal Board has noted, 
“The three-year statute of limitation is not a grant of a filing extension, but only a 
limitation upon claiming a refund.”12  
 
While Applicant was aware that taxpayers had a duty to file annual income tax 
returns, he nonetheless relied on his first accountant’s improper advice for several 
years. She did not file his state and federal income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 
2013 until March 2015. It is difficult under these circumstances to fault Applicant for 
relying on what he reasonably thought at the time was proper professional advice.  
 
At some point in 2016, Applicant’s accountant became non-responsive. Applicant 
made numerous calls, e-mails and visits to the accountant requesting that she return his 
tax paperwork, to no avail. His second accountant was also unable to verify the first 
accountant’s qualifications. Like “proving a negative,” it is difficult for an applicant to 
meet his burden and prove by substantial evidence that someone he relied on for 
professional advice became nonresponsive. Nonetheless, Applicant has done so here.  
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 12-11375 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jun. 17, 2016) (citing and discussing 26 U.S.C. § 6511) 
 
 
10 
 
 
When Applicant was preparing his SCA, in May 2016, his 2014 and 2015 state 
and Federal income tax returns were both past due, as he reported. Applicant was still 
relying on his first accountant at this time, and he provided her contact information on 
his SCA.13 Indeed, he believed even at the time of his PSI, in March 2017, that he was 
still working with her, as he indicated in his interview. In fact, by then he had lost contact 
with her. 
 
Applicant’s late-filed income tax returns, as alleged in the SOR, are largely 
attributable to the poor advice and non-responsiveness of his first accountant, hired in 
2011. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) therefore applies. An exception is 2008, which pre-
dates those problems. While I must consider all of Applicant’s tax filing allegations 
together, his 2008 tax filing is (unlike the others) largely attributable to his youth and 
inexperience at the time, just a year after college. It is therefore also unlikely to recur, 
though for other reasons than those beyond Applicant’s control. 
 
 In weighing Applicant’s responsibility under the circumstances (the second prong 
of AG ¶ 20(b)) and his good-faith efforts (AG ¶ 20(d)), I must consider the timing of 
Applicant’s actions. The Appeal Board has consistently held that timing of an applicant’s 
resolution of his tax filing problems is relevant in evaluating mitigation. An applicant who 
resolves financial or tax problems only when his clearance might be imperiled raises 
questions about his willingness to follow the sometimes complex rules governing 
classified information when his personal interests are not at stake.14  
 
In that regard, I must consider the fact that Applicant’s state and federal tax 
returns for several years (2014 to 2016) were filed in April 2018, on the eve of both the 
annual state and Federal tax deadlines, and the hearing. However, as noted, Applicant 
relied to his detriment on an accountant who gave him bad advice and who ultimately 
proved non-responsive. That circumstance explains, at least in part, why Applicant also 
did not file his 2016 tax returns on time, by April 2017 (almost a year after he submitted 
his SCA). His 2016 tax returns are not alleged, but I must also consider their late filing 
and their effect on mitigation. Both Applicant and his wife were hospitalized and he was 
out of work for a certain period during this time, which explains some, though not all, of 
the delay. Applicant also had to find another accountant to help him, since his first one 
was unreliable and nonresponsive. This all took time.  
 
Applicant testified credibly that he was well aware that his unfiled tax returns 
were a problem, both as related to his clearance and otherwise. He testified credibly 
that he became more and more concerned about his taxes as his first accountant went 
missing. He testified credibly that he kept his supervisors informed of his situation, and 
                                                          
13 Applicant acknowledged that he also should have disclosed on his SCA that his 2011-2013 tax returns 
were also not timely filed. He testified that he did not do because, though late, those returns had been 
filed by the time he submitted his SCA. Though Applicant’s interpretation of how he should have 
answered those questions was wrong, I find his explanation credible, and conclude that he did not intend 
to deceive the Government by withholding that information. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017). 
 
 
11 
 
 
documented it. This is how Applicant found his way to the second accountant, a CPA, 
and the wife of one of his supervisors.  
 
Applicant hired his second accountant in July 2017 (before the SOR), and began 
to get his affairs in order. This, too, took time, for a variety of reasons, including the 
accountant’s availability, as well as the fact that many of Applicant’s tax records were in 
his (absent) first accountant’s possession. Thus, even though Applicant’s remaining 
unfiled tax returns whether alleged (2014 and 2015) or not (2016) were filed shortly 
before the hearing, Applicant has sufficiently explained why this happened. 
 
Applicant’s tax filing issues, as alleged in the SOR, have now all been resolved. 
Applicant and his CPA have filed the past-due state and federal returns alleged in the 
SOR. He documented that he owes no outstanding past-due state or federal taxes. The 
Appeal Board has held that an applicant cannot simply adopt a position of “no harm, no 
foul” or “all’s well that ends well.”15 However, I nonetheless conclude that Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances, and in good-faith. While Applicant has not 
established much of a track record of steady, timely, good-faith compliance with the 
requirements to file annual state and federal income tax returns, this is explainable 
under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
In working with a qualified, professional CPA whom he has come to trust, 
Applicant has received and is receiving “financial counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c) applies.  
 
With his second accountant’s assistance, Applicant has “made arrangements 
with the appropriate tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance 
with those arrangements.” AG ¶ 20(g) therefore applies. Other than for 2008, AG ¶ 
20(a) has less application to his other late-filed tax returns, given their recent resolution. 
 
According to Applicant’s testimony, his wife still has significant unresolved tax 
debt from her prior marriage, and her prior home, which her first husband abandoned, is 
facing foreclosure. But Applicant has been cautious about the impact that debt might 
have on his clearance ever since he found out about it, and took steps to resolve it. He 
has also kept his supervisors and employer informed about his tax problems. Most 
importantly, Applicant is now working with a reliable, qualified tax advisor and testified 
credibly that he will continue to do so in the future. Though his tax filings have only 
recently been resolved, I am confident that they will not recur, given what Applicant has 
already been through. In that regard, Applicant’s tax filing issues are unlikely to recur 
and no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) therefore applies.  
 
 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015) 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate Applicant’s demeanor at the hearing and to 
form an opinion of his credibility. He was intelligent, well-spoken, and respectful, and he 
treated the process seriously. He presented a well-documented, well-organized case. I 
found him to be a credible witness.16 Ultimately, I find that he recognized early on that 
he had tax problems, and that he took responsible steps to seek professional help in 
resolving them. His first accountant was effectively the cause of many of his problems. It 
took some time for Applicant to recognize this, and more time for him to deal with it. 
Notwithstanding the fact that many of the alleged late tax returns were filed quite 
recently, he engaged with his second accountant before the SOR was issued, and, with 
her help, has resolved the allegations. Having done so, Applicant is unlikely to find 
himself in this position again. In making this conclusion, I considered not only 
Applicant’s credibility, but the record evidence as a whole. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                                          
16 In her closing argument, Department Counsel also noted that she found Applicant’s testimony credible 
concerning the actions he took over the years to resolve his tax situation. (Tr. 99-100). While this is not 
dispositive, it is something I considered.  
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.     
            
                             
    _____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
