1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00620 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2007 through 2012 Federal tax returns. However, 
his failure to timely file was due to a lack of understanding and he has since filed the 
returns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 12, 
2015. On March 29, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017.  
  
Applicant received the SOR and submitted his Answer to the SOR on April 13, 
2018. He requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on May 16, 2018, and a complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, 
2 
 
was sent to Applicant on the same day. He was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on May 29, 2018, and his Response was received by the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) within the allotted 30 days and admitted without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 
2007 through 2012, as required. Applicant admits that he failed to timely file his returns, 
but states that the returns have since been filed. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old customer-relationship-management developer currently 
employed by a federal contractor since November 2015. He enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 
January 1980 and served honorably until August 1983. He served on active duty as an 
officer in the U.S. Navy from December 1987 until December 1997, and received a 
general discharge under honorable conditions. He held a security clearance for a period 
of time while on active duty. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1987 and a master’s 
degree in 1995. He and his wife married in 1998. (GX 1.)  
 
Applicant lived and worked in the United Kingdom (UK) from 2006 until 2013. He 
paid the requisite taxes to the UK while residing there. It was not until he returned to the 
United States that Applicant became aware that, as a U.S. citizen, he was required to file 
Federal tax returns for 2007 through 2012, the tax years when he resided in the UK. 
Applicant did not owe any taxes for these years. Applicant experienced some delay in 
filing the returns because the requisite supporting documents were stored in several 
locations due to moving internationally and the returns themselves were complex. 
Applicant filed his tax returns in approximately October 2017, however, the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) did not receive the initial filings. Applicant refiled the returns in 
December 2017. Tax transcripts indicate that Applicant’s returns for 2008 through 2012 
were received by the IRS on March 2, 2018. Applicant filed the 2007 return with the other 
returns, but has not yet received confirmation from the IRS. (Answer; Response.) 
Applicant timely filed his 2013 through 2015 Federal tax returns. The record evidence 
does not indicate that Applicant has any other financial issues. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
3 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 The record evidence establishes the following disqualifying condition under this 
guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file . . . annual Federal . . . income tax returns . . . as required.  
 
 The following mitigating condition under this guideline is potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to file his 2006 through 2012 Federal tax returns while living and 
working abroad was not an intentional disregard of his obligations, but instead was due 
to not understanding his filing requirements. Applicant filed and paid taxes in his country 
of residence during those years. Upon returning to the United States and learning of the 
filing requirements, Applicant was delayed in filing the past-due returns as a result of 
moving internationally and the complexity of the returns. However, he filed all of the 
returns prior to receiving the SOR. He did not owe any taxes for tax years 2006 through 
2012. He timely filed his 2013 through 2015 returns. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
5 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in reaching my decision.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the potential security concerns raised by his failure to timely file his tax returns. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
