 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00390 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 6, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On July 15, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP).  
(Government Exhibit 1.) On March 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 7, 2018. The Government offered five 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
 
2 
 
objection. The Applicant offered two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and 
B, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record remained open until close of business on August 21, 2018, to allow the Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted two 
Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B, which 
were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
August 15, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 28 years old and is getting a divorce.  He has a bachelor’s degree in 
Business Management.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Foreign 
Disclosure Assistant.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.   Applicant has been employed with his current employer since September 
2017. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified six delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,000.  
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  Credit reports of the 
Applicant dated October 25, 2016; and January 23, 2018, reflect that the debts were at 
one time owing.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.) 
       
 At the age of eighteen, Applicant joined the United States Navy from 2008 to 
2013, turning down college scholarships to help financially support his parents.  In 2013, 
he received an honorable discharge at the rank of E-4.  Applicant only got out of the 
Navy in 2013 because he wanted to get his education and then become an officer.  
During his military career, he went on deployment twice, and he received two Navy 
Achievement Medals.  Applicant held a security clearance during his military career that 
was transferred to his current employer.   After leaving the Navy, Applicant moved out of 
state to live with a friend with the idea that he could save money.  His friend lost his job, 
and Applicant ended up trying to pay the bills, but did not earn enough to do so.  
Applicant was unable to afford the car he had purchased while in the Navy.  Applicant 
moved back to his home state in September or August 2014, and started working for his 
current employer in September 2017.  Since then Applicant has been paying off his 
debts and building his credit.       
 
 The following delinquent debts became owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant was indebted to Navy FCU for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $19,612.  This was a car that Applicant purchased while in the 
 
3 
 
Navy that he could no longer afford when he left the military.  Applicant sold the car to 
carmax for $11,500 in January 2014.  Applicant set up a payment plan with the creditor 
in the amount of $221.12 monthly that started March 23, 2018, which he has been 
paying and will continue to pay until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and Tr. 
p. 24.)      
 
1.b.  Applicant was indebted to Navy FCU for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $1,435.  Applicant set up a payment plan with the creditor in the 
amount of $221.12 monthly that started March 23, 2018, which he has been paying and 
will continue to pay until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and Tr. p. 24.)  
 
1.c.   Applicant was indebted to creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $643.  Applicant set up a payment plan with the creditor in 
the amount of $170.95 monthly that started on February 26, 2018, which he has been 
paying and will continue to pay until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A and Tr. 
p. 23.)      
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $294.  Applicant paid the debt in full on August 21, 2018.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)           
 
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was 120 days or more past 
due in the approximate amount of $126 with a total loan balance of $552.  This is an old 
credit card.  Applicant states that the debt has been paid off in full and it is no longer 
showing as delinquent on his credit report.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A and Tr. 
p. 47.)      
 
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $776.  This was a debt owed for military housing.  Applicant 
states that the debt has been paid off in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A and Tr.  
48.) 
 
 Applicant now follows a monthly financial budget.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A.)  After paying his regular monthly expenses, he has $821 left at the end of the 
month in discretionary funds.  He now lives with two roommates and they share the rent 
in order to reduce his monthly expenses.  Applicant’s is now current with all of his 
monthly financial obligations.  He is living within his means and spending his money 
responsibly. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was delinquently indebted in the amount of $22,000.  Transitioning 
from military life to civilian life has been difficult.  However, he has made the 
adjustments and has been demonstrating that he can resolve his debt.  The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations is 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and   
   
  (d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  It is recognized that leaving the military, having problems finding a suitable job, 
and going through a long divorce has prevented Applicant from being able to pay his 
debt.  Since obtaining full-time employment with a defense contractor in September 
2017, Applicant has been working diligently to resolve his debts.  He has either set up 
payment plans with the creditors that he is following, and/or he has paid off the 
outstanding debt.  There is clear evidence in the record that he has acted reasonably 
and responsibly under the circumstances.  His actions reflect reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
