 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00256 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information in response to the Government’s 
case to overcome the security concerns raised by his financial problems and by his 
intentional falsification of answers to questions in his security clearance application. 
Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 27, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
 
On March 8, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) 
and requested a decision without a hearing.  
 
On May 23, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on June 1, 2018, and he was informed he had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on July 1, 
2018, after Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I received this case for decision on 
September 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $22,760 for ten 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.j). Applicant denied SOR 1.f, but admitted the 
remaining Guideline F allegations. The largest debts alleged are at SOR 1.a ($10,400 for 
a car repossession in 2012) and SOR 1.j ($7,863 for a state tax lien entered in September 
2016). (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately gave false 
answers to questions in e-QIP Section 26 (Financial) when he omitted the state tax lien 
addressed in SOR 1.f (SOR 2.a); and when he did not list any of the delinquent debts 
listed in SOR 1.a – 1.j (SOR 2.b). Applicant denied SOR 2.a and admitted SOR 2.b. With 
his Answer, Applicant provided a one-page explanatory statement and a single-page 
letter, dated April 16, 2018, from the state tax authority holding the lien addressed in SOR 
1.j. 
 
 The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR, by the 
contents of two credit reports obtained during his background investigation, and by the 
summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) Applicant had with a government 
investigator in August 2017. (FORM, Items 2 – 6) In addition to the facts thus established, 
I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since March 2017. He and his wife have been married since December 1990. A 
previous marriage in March 1979 ended by divorce in October 1989. Applicant served in 
the U.S. Army from July 1986 until August 1990, and from January 1991 until retiring in 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on six enclosed exhibits (Items 1 
– 6). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
January 2011. He held a security clearance throughout his military career. (FORM, Items 
2 and 3) 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to the loss of his wife’s income while 
they both cared for her father for several years before he died from Alzheimer’s disease. 
The burden of his father-in-law’s care also brought on medical issues for Applicant’s wife. 
The debts alleged at SOR 1.g – 1.i are for unpaid medical accounts. Applicant was not 
aware of these debts when he submitted his e-QIP because his wife was handling those 
bills. (FORM, Items 2 and 4) 
 
 Applicant incurred the $10,400 debt alleged at SOR 1.a in 2012 when he returned 
a car he had purchased in 2010 for $21,500. By 2012, he could no longer afford to make 
the required purchase loan payments. Applicant was notified in 2012 that he owed a 
remaining deficiency of $5,200. In his August 2017 PSI, Applicant claimed he was making 
$100 monthly payments and that the remaining balance due was about $2,000. He has 
not documented this claim, and the outstanding debt of $10,400 is still reflected in a 
January 2018 credit report. He did not list the debt in his e-QIP because he believed he 
was current in his repayment efforts. (FORM, Items 4 and 6) 
 
 The $1,040 debt alleged at SOR 1.c is for a delinquent personal loan obtained in 
July 2015. Applicant fell behind on this loan in November 2016, around the time he moved 
from State A to his current residence in State B. At his August 2017 PSI, he claimed he 
has been making $50 payments since early 2017. He did not corroborate his claim with 
any additional documents, and he did not list the debt in his e-QIP because it was not 
more than 120 days past due at the time. A January 2018 credit report now lists the debt 
as more than 180 days past due. (FORM, Items 4 and 6) 
 
 The $951 debt at SOR 1.d is for a delinquent cell phone account. Applicant opened 
the account in 2010, but in 2015 closed it early and incurred an early termination penalty. 
Applicant acknowledged receiving a collection notice about this account. It is still 
unresolved. (FORM, Items 4 – 6) 
 
 The $332 debt alleged at SOR 1.f is for a past-due credit card account Applicant 
opened for his daughter in 2012. He is listed as an authorized user of the card, and he 
stated in his PSI that he would contact his daughter to resolve the delinquency. As of 
January 2018, the account was still listed as delinquent. (FORM, Items 4 – 6) 
 
 Applicant moved from State A to his current residence in State B in October 2016. 
In September 2016, State A perfected a lien against Applicant for unpaid property taxes 
for 2015 totaling $7,863. Applicant claimed he has been making monthly payments since 
September 2016. In support of his claim, he provided information with his Answer showing 
the balance owed was $3,522.21, pending another payment on April 30, 2018. Applicant 
did not list this debt in his e-QIP because he has been making payments. He 
acknowledged in his PSI that he should have listed the debt. Applicant did not provide 
any record of payments made, but the referenced payment amount is $250. Assuming 
those payments were made as claimed over the 18 months between September 2016 
and March 2018, the total paid would have been about $4,500. (FORM, Items 2 – 4) 
 
4 
 
 
 When he was interviewed in August 2017, Applicant described his financial health 
as “poor but improving.” His wife’s health has improved since 2015 and he is better off 
financially since being hired for his current job in early 2017. Applicant did not provide any 
specific information about his finances (i.e., budget, income, expenses, savings, etc.) and 
he has not sought any financial counseling or other assistance to resolve his debts, which 
remain mostly unresolved. 
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP, he answered “no” to all of the questions in 
Section 26 (Financial Record). By doing so, he omitted all of the debts alleged in SOR 1. 
He did not disclose the state tax lien against him on which he then had been paying for 
about seven months. He also did not disclose his actual failure to pay the state taxes that 
are the subject of the lien. As to his other debts, Applicant may not have been fully aware 
of the medical debts for his wife’s care because she was handling those bills. 
Nonetheless, at the very least, he was aware when he completed the e-QIP that he owed 
a deficiency for a car repossession and that he had a delinquent cellphone account. In 
discussing these items with the government investigator, he initially reaffirmed his e-QIP 
answers before being confronted with the contents of a June 2017 credit report. During 
the interview, Applicant also claimed that he had been making payments on most of those 
accounts. (FORM, Items 3 and 4) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). 
 
In response, Applicant claimed that his financial problems arose from 
circumstances beyond his control, thus invoking the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b): 
                                                 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 This mitigating condition is not available to Applicant because he did not establish 
that he acted responsibly in the face of the circumstances he cites. The information he 
provided about the outstanding state property tax lien supports his claim he has been 
making monthly payments on that debt. Nonetheless, he did not support his other claims 
of payment as it was incumbent on him to do. The information about those debts 
contained in the Government’s information remains unchanged. Applicant was advised in 
the FORM that he had another opportunity to provide information in support of his claims, 
but he did not present anything new. 
 
 Available information does not support any of the other pertinent mitigating 
conditions under this guideline. Applicant’s financial problems are current because his 
debts remain unresolved. As noted, there is little information from which to conclude that 
he has been making a good-faith effort to pay his debts. Applicant did not present any 
detailed information that shows his current finances are sound, and he has not sought 
any assistance or counseling to resolve his debts. I find that Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns raised by the Government’s information about his finances. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is stated at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant denies that he intentionally omitted his tax lien and tax debt from his e-
QIP. He admitted intentionally omitting his other debts from his e-QIP. My review of all of 
the available information probative of his intent when he completed his e-QIP leads me 
to conclude that he deliberately provided false information in his e-QIP. This information 
requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a):  
  
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 At the very least, Applicant knew of his tax lien, his car repossession debt, and his 
cell phone account debt. He acknowledged being contacted at or near the time those 
debts accrued, and he claimed he had been making payments on those debts for some 
period of time before he completed his e-QIP. This was not Applicant’s first experience 
with applying for a clearance and responding to questions about his background, as he 
held a clearance for most of his military career. He knew or should have known that given 
his circumstances, he should at least have answered “yes” to one or more of the e-QIP 
Section 26 questions. 
 
I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Rather than correct his omissions, it 
was not until he was confronted with information about those debts during his August 
2017 PSI that he acknowledged the debts. Applicant did not establish that he received or 
sought any guidance that may have caused him to provide inaccurate information. Finally, 
there is nothing minor about Applicant’s willingness to provide false and misleading 
answers to fundamental and reasonable questions from the government. In response to 
the SOR and the FORM, Applicant did not present any information that shows why his 
omissions should not cast doubt on his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. The 
security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated. 
 
8 
 
 
 
   
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were raised 
by his financial problems or by his intentional omissions of information from his 
application. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
