 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 18-00354 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 6, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 8, 2018. The Government offered six 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered thirteen exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A 
through M, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on her own 
 
2 
 
behalf. The record remained open until close of business on August 22, 2018, to allow 
the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant 
submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, 
which was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 17, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old.  She is divorced with four children.  She has a high 
school diploma and some college.  She holds the positon of Financial Analyst with a 
defense contractor.  She seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with her 
employment in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to nine separate creditors totaling 
approximately $30,000 that include charge-offs, collection accounts, and a 
repossession.  In her Answer, Applicant admits each of the allegations.  Credit reports 
of the Applicant dated September 7, 2016; and March 16, 2016, reflect that each of 
these debts were owing at one point.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 6.)  Applicant has 
been working for her current employer since November 2014.   
 
 Prior to 2014, Applicant had no financial problems.  She paid $1,400 in monthly 
rent, and it was current along with her other bills.  In 2015, Applicant paid to move to a 
larger rental property with the understanding that her youngest daughter, who was 21 
years old and pregnant at the time, and her boyfriend, would move in with her, and they 
would all share the rent.  Although they moved in with the Applicant, they never paid 
rent.  Applicant ended up supporting the household, including the moving expenses, the 
monthly rent, which was about $2,300 monthly, and all of the utility bills.  Applicant’s 
daughter’s boyfriend ended up not having a job or money, and so he had nothing for the 
baby that was born in 2015.  He is now in prison for 15 years and Applicant’s daughter 
has a restraining order against him.  Applicant used her credit cards to buy the things 
the baby needed.  (Tr. p. 44.)  Applicant also used credit cards to maintain the house, 
buy food, as well as diapers and formula.             
 
 To reduce her expenses, Applicant moved out of the house, and is now renting a 
room for $850 monthly that she lives in.  She now has more money to live on and pay 
her bills.  As she resolves her bills, she moves on to another one that she has not 
addressed.  She plans to resolve all of her debt.  Applicant’s daughter is now working at 
a grocery store in the meat department, making about $12.00 hourly and paying her 
bills.  Applicant still helps out financially with the baby’s necessities, such as clothing 
and supplies.  Applicant drives an economic car with car payments of $289 monthly.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 The following delinquent debts were listed in the SOR became owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $22,271.  This was a car repossession.  Applicant purchased 
the car in May 2014 and made the payments until she could no longer do so.  She plans 
to pay this debt after paying off her debt to the IRS.  (Applicant’s Response to SOR.)      
 
1.b.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $2,712.  The debt has increased to $3,166.14.  Applicant set up 
a payment plan to start May 2018 in the amount of $25 monthly to be paid until the debt 
is resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)   
 
1.c.   Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection 
in the approximate amount of $959.  Applicant set up a payment plan to start May 2018 
in the amount of $39.50 monthly to be paid until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit D.)      
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $931.  Applicant set up a payment plan to pay $50 monthly 
on the 14th of every month to start on May 14, 2018, to be paid until the debt is resolved.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit A.)       
 
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $891.  Applicant set up an electronic debit agreement to 
start March 2018 in the amount of $113.28 monthly to be paid until the debt is resolved.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit F.)      
 
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $776.  Applicant set up a payment plan to start March 2018 
in the amount of $97.02 monthly to be paid until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit E.) 
 
1.g.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $530.  This was a credit card that Applicant used to buy basic 
necessities for the newborn baby, and to maintain the household expenses.  She plans 
to contact the creditor to set up a payment plan soon.  (Applicant’s Response to SOR.)           
  
1.h.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $1,643.  This was a credit card that Applicant used to buy basic 
necessities for the newborn baby, and to maintain the household expenses.  Applicant 
has paid off the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)      
 
1.i.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $98.  Applicant paid the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)   
 
 Applicant also volunteered that she owes Federal back taxes for tax years 2015, 
2015, and 2016 in the amount of $4,541.54.  Since March 2018, she has been making 
 
4 
 
regular monthly payments of $150 monthly to resolve the debt, which will continue until 
the debt is paid in full.  (Tr. p. 29 and Applicant’s Exhibit G.) 
 
 Applicant further volunteered that she owes state back taxes for tax years 2015 
in the amount of $3,464.  She has a credit of $3,200, and so now owes approximately 
$759.99 to the state.  (Tr. p. 31.)  She has set up a payment plan that started in June 
2018 in the amount of $103 monthly to be paid until the debt is resolved.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit H.) 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of her earnings statement and a monthly financial 
report.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  The monthly 
financial report indicates that after Applicant pays all of her monthly expenses and past 
bills she has about $596 left in discretionary funds that she plans to use for other bills.  
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.)  Applicant also provided a letter from her human 
resources manager indicating that she currently earns $98,646 annually.  (Applicant’s 
Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
 Letters of recommendation from a number of coworkers and friends attest to 
Applicant’s honesty, hardworking nature and responsible character.  She is known to be 
thoughtful, reliable and supportive, and is considered to be a valuable employee.  She is 
highly recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L.)  
 
 Applicant has received a ten percent raise for her hard work and dedication on 
the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit M/) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
5 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.  Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;    
 
 Applicant has always been the main financial provider of her family household, 
providing support for four children on her own.  She admits that she made some bad 
decisions by moving her pregnant daughter and her boyfriend in with her when they did 
not have employment.  She also spent money on the baby that she could not afford.  
Since 2015, she has been working diligently to resolve her delinquent debt.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
Since 2015, Applicant has been working diligently to resolve her delinquent debt.  
She has significantly reduced her monthly expenses, and is careful about how she 
spends money.  She has paid off and resolved some of her delinquent debt and is 
making regular monthly payments to pay others.  She is also paying off delinquent back 
taxes that were not alleged in the SOR.  She understands the importance of living within 
her means and paying her bills on time.  She also understands the responsibilities that 
come along with possessing a security clearance.  She is now on the correct path and 
has demonstrated financial responsibility.  She has acted reasonably and responsibly 
under the circumstances, and has demonstrated good judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  The Financial Considerations concern has been mitigated.  
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
