 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00317 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 5, 2017. On 
February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2018, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations and explaining that he included these delinquent debts in his planned 
bankruptcy petition. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The case was assigned to me on April 19, 2018. On July 20, 2018, the Defense Office 
 
2 
 
 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
August 8, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5 were admitted without objection. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He graduated from high school in 2001. Applicant was 
married in 2011 and reports two daughters, ages 6, and 16, and a son, age 2.  (Tr. 10-
11) Applicant has been employed as a warehouse specialist by a federal contractor  
since October 2010. Applicant’s wife was also a warehouse specialist for the same 
federal contractor until she elected to be a stay-at-home mother after a period of 
maternity leave in 2016.  
 
 The SOR alleged eight delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,000, 
including credit card and consumer debts. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his 
Answer to the SOR. Applicant testified that he was working with a national debt relief-
consolidation service and in a repayment plan, when his employer reclassified their jobs 
and the union went on strike in 2016. (Tr. 13, 33) Applicant and his wife were 
unemployed and could not keep up with payments on their debt consolidation plan, 
which was discontinued. (Tr. 14) Applicant was out of work for six months and his wife 
was out for almost one year before she was called back at a lower rate of pay. She 
worked approximately five months before taking maternity leave to have their second 
child. (AE A)2  
 
Applicant testified credibly that he and his wife felt they had no choice but to file 
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection after the issuance of the SOR. (Tr.15) They spoke 
to a bankruptcy attorney in June 2017 (Tr. 40) and saved money for a year before they 
could afford the $1,500 attorney’s fee. Their bankruptcy petition was filed on June 28, 
2018, and it is was supposed to be discharged by the end of August 2018. (Tr. 15, AE 
B) They also surrendered their home, purchased in 2009, coincidentally with the 
bankruptcy filing. (Tr. 30)  Upon advice of their bankruptcy counsel, they stopped paying  
credit card debts and other consumer debts that were later listed as unsecured debts in 
the bankruptcy filing. (Tr. 32, AE B) It was their first time filing for bankruptcy protection, 
and Applicant completed the prerequisite financial counseling. (Tr. 32) All of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are included in their Chapter 7 petition at schedule 
F, list of unsecured debts. (Tr. 39, AE B) Applicant disclosed assets of $87,000 and 
liabilities of $146,000 in the bankruptcy petition.  
 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 5, 2017 security 
clearance application (SCA). 
 
2 Applicant’s handwritten opening statement was adopted as substantive evidence, and admitted as AE A, 
without objection.  
 
3 
 
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and documents submitted at the hearing. The Government 
produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.3  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; and    
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control.  
 
 Applicant endured a setback when his union went on strike and he and his wife 
had financial stress, including her unemployment for one year, and his lost wages for six 
months. These conditions were beyond his control. He demonstrated that he tried to 
resolve his delinquencies in good faith by entering into a repayment plan with a national 
debt relief-consolidation firm. However, he fell off the repayment plan when his union 
went on strike and he could not keep up with the payments. Applicant sought 
professional advice from a bankruptcy attorney, and ultimately felt compelled to file for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. He has now produced relevant and responsive 
documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant appropriately engaged an attorney and filed for bankruptcy protection to 
address his financial problems. He also had independent financial counseling. All of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are being resolved through Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  
He has met his burden to show that his financial problems are under control, and that 
his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The 
mitigating conditions enumerated above in AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant is a devoted husband, and raising 
three children. He has worked continuously for over 12 years for federal contractors, 
without issues. He has struggled to overcome his financial travails and pay off his debts. 
He is now completing a bankruptcy plan to resolve his financial problems. Applicant 
testified credibly and persuasively that his finances are now under control. Applicant has 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer are a security concern. The record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:              For Applicant 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                 Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
 
