 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00310 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 7, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On December 7, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  (Government Exhibit 1.) On March 28, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 23, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on July 30, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 14, 2018. The Government offered five 
 
2 
 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered three exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A 
through C, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 22, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 51 years old and married with one step daughter and one son.  He 
has a bachelor’s degree in Technical Management and is working on his masters’ 
degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor is a Senior Technician.  He is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified eighteen delinquent debts totaling in excess of approximately 
$50,000.  Applicant admitted allegations 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 
1.n., and 1.o., set forth in the SOR.  He denied allegations 1.a., 1.b., and 1.e.  
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Applicant failed to address allegations 1.p., 1.q., 1.r., and 
1.s.  His silence is viewed as a denial of the allegations.  Credit reports of the Applicant 
dated March 28, 2017; January 9, 2018; and July 20, 2018, confirm the debts listed in 
the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4 and 5.)  
       
 From 1986 to 1993 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air 
Force. Then from 1993 through 2013 he served in the Air National Guard.  He was 
honorably discharged from both services.  Applicant was married to his first wife from 
1988 to 1992.  He then married his present wife.   
 
 Applicant attributes a number of life events to his financial problems.  He 
explained that when he retired from the military in 2013, he lost two–thirds of the pay 
that he normally received.  He no longer received housing allowance or food allowance, 
and then only received 56% of his base pay.  For about eight months, Applicant was 
waiting for his VA disability and could barely keep up with the house payment.  
Applicant worked part-time for a company from 2011 through 2015, and he would be a 
substitute for those on vacation.   He was hired full time in January or February 2015.   
(Tr. p. 26.)   
 
 Applicant also explained that in 2014 his wife got a DUI and was in a car accident 
that totaled the car.  (Tr. p. 26.)  He had to incur the cost of purchasing another car that 
he had not expected.  In 2016, his wife got another DUI.  Applicant had to pay for her 
attorney fees and other related court fines and expenses.  (Tr. p. 26.)   
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant states that his parents are his dependents.  He has also been helping 
his son, an E-1 in the Army, with his car payment, as he did not want his son to go 
through the financial difficulties he did.  (Tr. p. 27.) 
 
 In January 2017, Applicant learned that his impound account on his house 
payment was miscalculated and had to be raised $600 monthly.  (Tr. p. 27.)  Applicant 
received a loan modification in April 2018 and now the payment is only a couple 
hundred dollars more and now his retirement check covers the payment as it did before. 
(Tr. p. 28.) 
 
 The following delinquent debts were listed in the SOR became owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant was indebted to a creditor for a mortgage account that was past due in 
the approximate amount of $18,036, with a total balance of $236,660.  Applicant 
borrowed money from his 401K to make three months of payments in order to get a 
loan modification.  His monthly payments are now $2,023 and he has brought the 
account current.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)        
 
1.b.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $759, with a total balance of $8,504.  This is Applicant’s wife 
vehicle payment.  He pays $258 monthly, and has brought the account current.  (Tr. pp. 
30-31.)     
 
1.c.   Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $8,411.  This is Applicant’s daughter’s vehicle that Applicant co-
signed for in 2008.  She lost her job, could not pay for it and Applicant had it voluntarily 
repossessed.  (Tr. p. 33.)  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 34.)     
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $1,304, with a total balance of $6,698.  This is a loan for 
landscaping he took out in 2016 to reduce his water bill.  The debt remains owing.  (Trp. 
35.)             
 
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $381, with a total balance of $4,028.  Applicant contends that 
this is his parents’ account, as he is only an authorized user.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and 
Government Exhibit 5.)        
 
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $902, with a total balance of $902.  This is a payday loan 
opened in May 2017.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 37.) 
 
1.g.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $249, with a balance of $881.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 
38.)           
  
 
4 
 
1.h.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $75, with a total balance of $833.  This was a credit card.  The 
debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 38.)        
 
1.i.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $754.  This was a credit card.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 
40.)  
 
1.j.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was past due in the 
approximate amount of $60, with a total balance of $634. Applicant states that the debt 
is now current.  (Tr. p. 38.)         
 
1.k.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $615.  The debt remains owing.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR)   
 
1.l.   Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $463.  This was a credit card.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. 
p. 40.)     
 
1.m.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection 
in the approximate amount of $360.  This was a credit card.  The debt remains owing.  
(Tr. pp. 40 - 41.)         
 
1.n.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $358.  Applicant contacted the creditor and plans to pay it 
off at the end of the month.  (Tr. p. 42.)        
 
1.o.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $127. 
 
1.p.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $277.  This is a credit card.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 
43.)        
 
1.q.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for a judgment filed against him in 2013 in the 
approximate amount of $1,505.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 44.)           
 
1.r.  Applicant was indebted to a creditor for a judgment filed against him in 2014 in the 
approximate amount of $1,030.  This is for HOA dues.  Applicant states that he paid the 
debt in March 2018 and it is now current.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)      
 
1.s.  Applicant filed for Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in February 2004.  The bankruptcy was 
discharged in November 2005.  (Tr. p. 24.)     
  
 Applicant earns about $110,000 annually and his wife brings in about $20,000.  
He has not adjusted his lifestyle to his income and so it continues to be financially 
difficult.  He admits that he lives paycheck to paycheck, but he intends to pay all of his 
 
5 
 
delinquent debts.  He has about 27 cents in his savings account.  He does not have 
discretionary funds available to pay the rest of his delinquent debt at this time.  Now that 
his house payment and HOA payments are caught up, and he is able to make his both 
car payments of $258 and $496 monthly, he now believes that he can focus on the 
collection accounts in the SOR.  (Tr. p. 51.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant remains excessively indebted and cannot afford to pay his bills.  It is 
noted that in the past, Applicant had some difficulties adjusting from military income to 
civilian income, and was forced to wait eight or nine months before receiving his 
disability benefits and ultimately a full time job.  However, he has been working full time 
since 2015.  Instead of paying his bills, he continues to provide financial support to his 
relatives, namely his parents, his son, his daughter and wife, when he is unable to pay 
his own debts.  That is his choice.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
 
 
 
7 
 
  The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations is 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
  Recently, Applicant has brought his mortgage current with a loan modification 
and has caught up with his HOA payments.  In regard to his other delinquent debts, 
most of them remain owing.  He does not appear to have the financial resources 
available to pay them.  Based upon these facts, there is no evidence that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  There remain questions about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.r.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.s.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
