 1 
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 18-00109 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.)  Applicant has not paid or otherwise resolved any of her delinquent 
debts. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 15, 2017. On January 26, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent 
her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR, submitted her Answer on February 23, 2018, and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 11, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, was sent to 
Applicant on April 12, 2018. She received the FORM on April 24, 2018, and was given an 
 2 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. She did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on July 27, 
2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling approximately $13,410. These debts 
include 10 medical debts totaling $4,847, a $4,457 past-due balance for a repossessed 
vehicle, and a delinquent student loan. In her Answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 
1.q, 1.r, and 1.u, which total $2,576. She denies the remaining debts, stating that she 
disputes them. She provided copies of letters dated February 15, 2017, to each of the 
creditors of the SOR debts. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old registered nurse employed on a part-time as-needed 
basis by a defense contractor since April 2017. She received her associate’s degree in 
2014 and her bachelor’s degree in 2016. She took courses towards a second bachelor’s 
degree from December 2016 until April 2017. Applicant was unemployed from June 2014 
until March 2017, while a full-time student. This is her first application for a position of 
trust through DOD. (GX 3.)   
  
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.p are listed on the January 2018 credit 
bureau report (CBR) and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.q through 1.u are listed on the 
April 2017 CBR. Applicant discussed the SOR debts with the investigator during 
Applicant’s personal subject interview (PSI) in July 2017. (GX 6; GX 5; GX 4.) 
 
  Applicant attributes her delinquent debts to her two years and nine months of 
unemployment while she was attending college full time. Applicant also did not have 
health insurance for part of the time she was unemployed, and as a result of medical 
problems, incurred medical debt.   
 
 Applicant incurred the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR between 2012 and 
2017, a period of time which exceeds the span of her unemployment. While the copies of 
Applicant’s dispute letters are dated February 15, 2017, the January 2018 CBR does not 
reflect that any of the listed delinquent accounts are disputed by Applicant. (GX 6.) 
Further, Applicant did not provide any evidence of additional contact with the creditors of 
the disputed debts or any other efforts to resolve her delinquent accounts. In her PSI, 
Applicant stated that she would enter repayment arrangements with each of the creditors 
when she gained full-time employment.  
 
 
 
 
Policies 
                                                          
1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 12, 2018, and Applicant’s receipt 
is dated April 24, 2018. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after receipt of the FORM 
to submit information.   
 3 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
 4 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline apply:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 While some of Applicant’s financial difficulties may have been the result of 
circumstances largely beyond her control, such as her medical issues, there is no 
indication that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Additionally, Applicant’s 
over two and half years of unemployment was the result of her decision to return to college 
full time. While such an investment in her future may have been a responsible long-term 
decision, it was, nonetheless, her choice. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is 
nothing in the record that explains the debts she incurred outside the period of her 
unemployment, nor does Applicant provide any explanation for her ongoing failure to 
resolve or otherwise address any of her delinquent debts. None of the other mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are applicable. 
 
Although Applicant asserts that she disputed each of the SOR debts, despite 
admitting four of them, she did not provide any explanation or evidence of the current 
status of these disputes. Each of the SOR debts is established by the CBRs, thus, the 
Government has made its prima facia case as to all of the SOR allegations. Applicant has 
failed to meet her burden of proof of mitigation.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of 
 5 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
