 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00340 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his use of marijuana in 
2017 while holding a security clearance. His request for continued eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 3, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for access to classified 
information. After reviewing the completed background investigation, which included his 
responses to interrogatories1 from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), 
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly 
                                                 
1 Authorized by Section E3.1.2.2, DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive) 
 
 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
 On March 16, 2018, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse).3 Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision 
without a hearing.  
 
 On May 24, 2018, DOHA Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM)4 in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on June 5, 2018, and 
was advised he had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in 
response to the FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM on June 6, 2018, and the 
record closed on June 13, 2018, when Department Counsel waived objection to 
Applicant’s response. I received the case on July 27, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana from 
early 2017 until June 2017 (SOR 1.a), and that he purchased marijuana from early 2017 
until July 2017 (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted both allegations. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has 
worked since April 2001. He has been married and divorced twice between 1989 and 
2013. He has two children, ages 14 and 27, and as of June 2016, had been cohabiting 
with his girlfriend since February 2014. Applicant has held a security clearance since at 
least November 2000. His eligibility for that clearance was last renewed in September 
2011. Additionally, Applicant served in the United States Army between August 1986 
and May 1988, and between November 1989 and July 1995. He then continued his 
service in the Army Reserve from December 1996 until October 1997. At the end of 
each period of service, he received an honorable discharge.  (FORM, Items 3 – 5) 
 
 On August 23, 2017, Applicant completed a personal subject interview (PSI) with 
a government investigator. During that interview, Applicant disclosed that before 2015, 
Applicant began suffering pain from a herniated disk in his spine. In 2015 and 2016, he 
was treated with physical therapy and with oxycodone for pain. Applicant described the 
pain medication as too strong and that he often felt like a “space cadet” when he took 
the prescribed pills. As of the date of his PSI, Applicant had not sought other pain 
medications from his doctor. Applicant stated in the PSI that he started using marijuana 
                                                 
2 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 - 5) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
in early 2017 to help with his back pain and to help him sleep. He bought marijuana 
from someone on the street and estimated his rate of use would project out to 12 times 
annually. Applicant last used marijuana in June 2017 because he had found “relief for 
back pain by other means.” He did not explain how he now manages his back pain. 
(FORM, Item 4) 
 
 Marijuana use for medicinal purposes is legal in the state where Applicant lives. 
In his response to interrogatories, he claimed he applied for a medical marijuana card in 
February 2017 and received it in June 2017. He did not document that claim, and he did 
not show that he purchased or used marijuana through any established medical 
marijuana program. Marijuana use is prohibited by his employer. Although the policy 
states that controlled substances may not be used on company premises or on 
company time, it also prohibits reporting to work “if testing would demonstrate that you 
have used or consumed an illegal drug.” The policy also contemplates an exception, 
wherein such substances, including marijuana, might be prescribed by a doctor. 
(FORM, Item 4) 
 
 I take administrative notice sua sponte of the fact that marijuana is a Schedule I 
controlled substance, the use and possession of which is a criminal violation of federal 
law. Guidance memoranda issued by the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense 
(OASD) in February 2013; by the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) in October 
2014; and by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in May 2015 all make clear 
that changes in the laws pertaining to marijuana by the various states, territories, and 
the District of Columbia do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines, and that federal law supercedes state laws on this issue. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
adjudicative guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those 
factors are:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
them to have access to protected information.9 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 Applicant used and purchased marijuana with varying frequency for the first half 
of 2017. His last known use occurred in June 2017, and he has held a security 
clearance at all times while using marijuana. This information reasonably raises a 
security concern that is stated at AG ¶ 24 as follows: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶ 
25 disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
  
 I also have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Department Counsel presented sufficient evidence to support the SOR allegations 
and raise security concerns under this guideline. It thus fell to Applicant to present 
information that warrants application of any pertinent mitigating conditions. In response 
to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant did not present information that would support any 
of these mitigating conditions. His drug use was recent, in that, it occurred after he 
submitted his e-QIP. As to whether it occurred under unusual circumstances and is 
unlikely to recur, he did not support his claim that he has found a new pain management 
option, thus obviating his motivation to use marijuana in the future. Applicant did not 
present information about his circumstances since his last known use of marijuana, and 
 
 
he did not provide any definitive statement regarding any future intent to abstain from 
using drugs. 
 
Although potentially legal under state law where he lives as a medical option, 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is still impermissible under his company’s drug-free 
workplace policy, under federal controlled substances laws, and under DOD industrial 
security policy guidance consistent with those laws. On balance, Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns established by the Government’s information. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and my application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline H, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). I note that Applicant served in 
the Army for almost ten years, and that he has held a security clearance without 
incident since at least November 2000. Nonetheless, Applicant’s recent use of 
marijuana, despite the clear and consistent company and government policies against 
such conduct, now raises doubts about his judgment, reliability, and willingness to follow 
rules and regulations regarding the protection of sensitive information. Because the 
protection of the national interest is the principal goal of these adjudications, those 
doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
