 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 18-01259 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that he was unable to make greater 
progress addressing the debts alleged in the statement of reasons (SOR). Financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On October 12, 2017, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3) On May 11, 2018, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued the SOR. 
(Item 1) The SOR was issued to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, which established in Appendix 
A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 
2017.  
 
On May 22, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a decision 
based upon the administrative record. (Item 2) On July 16, 2018, Department Counsel 
completed a File of Relevant Material (FORM) including six exhibits. (Items 1-6) On July 
 
2 
                                         
 
31, 2018, Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the 
evidence in the FORM, and Items 1-6 are admitted into evidence. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. On September 27, 2018, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted all of the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.h. (Item 2) He also provided mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer, and a government contractor has 
employed him since September 2017. 2 In 2002, he graduated from high school, and in 
2006, he received a bachelor’s degree. In 2010, he received a master’s degree. He has 
never served in the military. In 2012, he married, and he does not have any children.   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
From October 2011 to August 2012, Applicant was employed as an engineer. From 
August 2012 to October 2012, he was unemployed. From October 2012 to August 2015, 
he was employed on a systems engineer staff for a large government contractor. From 
August 2015 to September 2017, he was self employed and he was a chief executive 
officer for a company.   
   
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling $66,188 as follows: SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b are two charged-off debts owed to the same bank for $21,298 and $18,401; SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e are three placed for collection or charged-off debts that are owed to 
the same bank for $14,708, $3,664, and $3,328; SOR ¶ 1.f is a debt placed for collection 
originating at a store for $2,579; and SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are charged-off debts for $1,353 
and $857.  
 
Applicant disclosed several delinquent debts on his October 12, 2017 SCA, and in 
the comments section he explained that “[d]ue to self-employment/disability and my wife’s 
hours getting cut,” he had insufficient income to pay his debts, and they resorted to “heavy 
credit card use.” (Item 3) He said they are working to resolve their debt issues. (Item 3) 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant said his income went from $100,000 annually to 
$25,000 annually in August 2015. (Item 2) He attempted to work with a credit-repair 
company with the intention of settling his delinquent debt starting in April 2017. (Item 2) 
The credit-repair company did not settle his debts. (Item 2) Since February 2018, he has 
                                            
 
1 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from 
Applicant’s October 12, 2017 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
3 
                                         
 
been attempting to work with his creditors to settle his debts. (Item 2) He did not describe 
receipt of credit counseling or provide a budget. 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel noted the absence of corroborating or 
supporting documentation of resolution of the SOR issues. FORM at 2-3. Aside from 
Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no supporting documentary evidence, 
such as proof of payments to the credit-repair company or correspondence to or from the 
SOR creditors showing attempts to resolve debts. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
issues and other mitigating information. The FORM informed Applicant that he had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do 
not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned 
to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. FORM at 4. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
 
4 
                                         
 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
 
5 
                                         
 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant presented some mitigating evidence. He had periods of 
underemployment and underemployment. His spouse’s income was also reduced. He 
does not receive full mitigating credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because he did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances with respect to the SOR debts. He did not receive financial 
counseling, and he did not provide a budget.  
 
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving his delinquent debts. There is insufficient assurance that 
his financial problem is being resolved and will not recur in the future. Under all the 
circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
                                         
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guideline F are 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer, and a government contractor has 
employed him since September 2017. In 2006, he received a bachelor’s degree, and in 
2010, he received a master’s degree.  
 
Underemployment of Applicant and his spouse and unemployment of Applicant 
harmed Applicant’s finances. However, Applicant did not establish he had insufficient 
income to make greater progress resolving his SOR debts, and his actions show a lack 
of financial responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
