 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00478 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his past-due and 
delinquent debts. He has a long history of financial problems and the only payments 
currently being made on his debts are the result of involuntary wage garnishments. 
Applicant’s request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 9, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as part of his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense Consolidated 
 
2 
 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On March 6, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
decision without a hearing. On May 10, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 16, 2018, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to submit 
additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on June 15, 2018, 
after Applicant did not submit any response to the FORM, or object to any of the 
information presented therein. I received this case for decision on July 27, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes 
$125,394 for five delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.e). Three of the five 
allegations address delinquent child support accounts totaling $116,087. Applicant 
admitted, with explanations, all five allegations; however, in his response to SOR 1.d, he 
avers that the account is listed on his credit report as “closed.” In his response to SOR 
1.e, he claimed that the child support debt at SOR 1.e is the same account alleged at 
SOR 1.b. I have entered his responses to SOR 1.d and 1.e as denials, thus requiring the 
Government to present information to prove those allegations as controverted issues of 
fact.5  With his Answer, Applicant provided documentation in support of claims made in 
his responses. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
 The SOR allegations, including SOR 1.d and 1.e, are supported by Applicant’s 
admissions in his Answer, by his disclosures and statements in two e-QIPs and a personal 
subject interview (PSI) on August 8, 2017, by three credit reports, and by information from 
the court where the civil judgment alleged in SOR 1.d was entered. Applicant’s 
information regarding his child support debts does not support his claim that SOR 1.e is 
a duplicate of SOR 1.b. The information in his two most recent credit reports and in the 
summary of his PSI reflect at least three delinquent child support debts. (FORM, Items 3 
– 6, and 8 – 11) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since May 2017. He also worked for the same contractor, first as a temporary 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on 11 enclosed exhibits (Items 1 
– 11). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
5 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
 
3 
 
agency hire, then as a permanent employee, from February 2009 until December 2012. 
At that time, the contract he worked on expired and he was laid off and unemployed for 
seven months. In July 2013, he started his own small business, which was his only source 
of income until he was re-hired by his current employer. (FORM, Items 4 and 6) 
 
 Applicant served in the United States Army National Guard and Reserve from 
March 1997 until April 2001. Thereafter, he served on regular active duty in the Army until 
March 2004, when he was honorably discharged. In August 2004, he was hired as a 
systems analyst by a defense contractor in State A, where he was stationed when he left 
active duty. He held that job until moving to his current residence in State B in December 
2008. Applicant was unemployed in State B until February 2009. (FORM, Items 4 and 6) 
 
 Applicant first received a security clearance in June 1997. In September 2013, his 
clearance was revoked after he failed to respond to an SOR alleging security concerns 
about his finances. Specifically, it was alleged that he owed $44,874 for 16 delinquent or 
past-due debts, including one delinquent child support account and two delinquent car 
loans. Applicant re-applied for a security clearance when he submitted an e-QIP on 
November 30, 2009. In that application, he disclosed ten delinquent or past-due debts, 
including two child support accounts, totaling $6,189. (FORM, Items 4, 5 and 7) 
 
 Applicant and his first wife were married from February 1995 until divorcing in 
December 1999. They had two children, now ages 20 and 23. He and his second wife 
were married in October 2002, but separated in January 2011. The record does not reflect 
a divorce from his second wife. They had three children, now ages 10, 12, and 15. As of 
May 2017, Applicant had been living with his girlfriend since March 2011. (FORM, Items 
4 – 6)  
 
 Available information shows that Applicant is obligated to pay child support to both 
of his ex-wives. It does not show any allocation for each child, or how much of his debt is 
attributable to arrearages and how much is the original monthly obligation. Applicant’s 
pay is being involuntarily garnished for two child support accounts, one originating in State 
A, the other from State B. From each paycheck, $818.31 is withheld. This equates to 
about one-half of Applicant’s pay, leaving him with about $1,770 in monthly take home 
pay.6 At the monthly rate at which his pay is being garnished to satisfy $116,087 in unpaid 
child support, the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e will be paid off in 65 months. As of March 
2018, statements about two of his child support accounts showed balances totaling 
$105,988.05. (FORM, Items 3 and 6) 
 
 Applicant did not provide any other information about his personal finances. He 
attributes his child support and other debts to seven months of unemployment in 2013. 
He also stated that the income from his small business enterprise between July 2013 and 
May 2017 was insufficient to meet his child support obligations, as well as to resolve his 
other debts. Applicant did not document his income during that period and he did not 
explain or document his efforts to communicate with any of his creditors. The debts at 
SOR 1.c and 1.d, which total $9,307, remain unpaid. Applicant has not sought assistance 
                                                 
6 Assuming he is paid every other week, or 26 times annually. 
 
4 
 
from any financial counselor or other professional service to resolve his financial 
problems. 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.9 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.10 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
                                                 
7 See Directive, 6.3. 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
9 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
10 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
5 
 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.11 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Available information shows Applicant still owes more than $114,295 in delinquent 
or past-due debts. This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 
18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has experienced significant financial problems since at least 2003. This 
is not the first time the government has expressed concerns about his debts. The debts 
examined in this current investigation and adjudication have not been actively addressed 
by the Applicant, despite a previous revocation of his security clearance for the same 
reasons alleged in this SOR. This information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts 
regardless of the ability to do so); and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
By contrast, Applicant did not produce any information that warrants consideration 
of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. His financial problems are recent and ongoing. 
Although Applicant reasonably cites loss of employment and insufficient income as a 
circumstances beyond his control underlying his debts, he did not show that he has acted 
responsibly in the face of those circumstances. To the contrary, the only repayment 
documented in this record consists of involuntary garnishment of half of his pay by two 
different states. Although in his Answer he avers he is acting “in good faith” to address 
his debts, the record suggests otherwise. Applicant did not adequately support claims 
about negotiating with his creditors, and he did not present any information that shows 
his financial problems are under control. Applicant has not sought help through financial 
counseling or other professional assistance, and he has not provided any information 
about his current finances that would support a positive, predictive conclusion that his 
                                                 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
finances will not continue to pose a security concern in the future. Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns under this guideline raised by the Government’s 
information. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were raised 
by his financial problems. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
