1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 18-00589 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
denied. 
 Statement of the Case 
On March 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR on April 27, 2018, and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
(NOH) scheduling the hearing on August 8, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 3 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – J were admitted without objection. I left the record open for 
09/14/2018
 
2 
 
 
one week until August 15, 2018, for Applicant to submit a letter from her mother and 
county court documents from her divorce. (Tr. 74) She submitted these timely and her 
post-hearing documents were admitted as AE L. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on August 21, 2018. 
  
                    .    
   Applicant is 33 years old. She graduated from high school in 2003. She obtained 
her licensed practical nurse (LPN) certificate in 2014. Applicant married in 2004 and 
divorced in 2005. She married again in late 2005 and divorced in 2014. She has a 12- 
year-old daughter from that marriage. (Tr. 13) Applicant served in the Army National 
Guard from 2002 to 2005, and she received an honorable discharge after being 
medically separated. (Tr. 56-57) She has been employed by a federal agency working 
as a customer service representative since November 2016. (Tr. 14) Applicant and her 
daughter live with Applicant’s mother, who has a serious illness, and her step-father 
who is also disabled and unemployed. Applicant provides financial support to her 
mother and step-father. (Tr. 15, AE L)  
 
  Applicant testified that she struggled financially due to a protracted divorce 
process, starting with her separation in 2011. The divorce lasted three years and was 
contentious and expensive. (Tr. 15-16) She was a single mother raising her daughter 
and her ex-husband’s son from a prior relationship, as well as supporting her parents. 
Applicant testified and produced family court documents showing that her ex-husband 
was supposed to pay half of their daughter’s medical expenses and $500 in child 
support each month according to the divorce decree. (Tr.17, AE L) However, since May 
2015, he was only actually paying child support in the amount of $245 each month 
pursuant to a court ordered wage assignment or garnishment. (AE L)  
 
  The SOR alleges 24 delinquent debts including student loans, consumer credit 
debt, and medical debts totaling $91,278. Approximately $65,000 of that total debt, is 
owed to the Department of Education (DOE) for delinquent student loans as alleged at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.i. Applicant produced a document reflecting a balance of $81,741 
owed to DOE on February 27, 2018, as the interest continues to accrue. (AE A) 
Applicant obtained the student loans to attend four different colleges in pursuit of her 
nursing degree. (Tr. 24) Applicant provided a character reference from one of her 
professors attesting to the fact that Applicant was a straight-A student and graduated 
with honors. (AE K) She produced loan-rehabilitation documents at the hearing showing 
that she has now consolidated the afore-mentioned student loans for repayment, and 
entered into a plan to make payments of $61 each month starting in May 2018. (Tr. 22, 
AE A)  
 
  Applicant testified that she has paid in full the $6,334 in court costs and fines 
associated with her failure to maintain automobile insurance as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
                                                          
2 Unless otherwise indicated, these facts were taken from Applicant’s Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as a security clearance application (SCA) dated May 5, 
2017, and signed on the date of the hearing. 
 
 
3 
 
 
(Tr. 26, AE B) However, she testified that she borrowed this money from her mother to 
pay the county court, and she still owes her mother $3,000. (Tr. 26-27) She has not yet 
reached out to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b to establish a repayment plan. In her Answer to 
the SOR in April 2018, Applicant admitted to this charged-off debt, which resulted when 
she had inadequate insurance to cover an automobile wreck. Applicant denied the 
charged-off debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, claiming that it was her ex-husband’s debt. She 
produced no documents to substantiate this assertion.  
 
  Applicant disputed the delinquent medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j because she 
actually had health insurance coverage but the provider used her wrong date of birth in 
submitting the bill. She produced evidence of health insurance and this debt is now paid 
in full. (AE C) SOR ¶ 1.k is disputed because Applicant was only supposed to rent the 
subsidized apartment in question if she was enrolled full-time at the university. 
Although, Applicant produced documentation showing that she was working full time, 
while attending college, she has not demonstrated that she was enrolled full-time, or 
that she effectively disputed this debt with the creditor. (AE D)  
 
  Applicant admitted the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l and expressed her 
intent to mitigate it in her Answer. She stated that this was a joint debt with her ex-
husband and his son. He refuses to pay this and many other joint debts acquired during 
their marriage. She offered no evidence of any payment plan, and this debt remains 
unresolved. Applicant produced documentation at the hearing showing that the medical 
debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.u, owed to the same creditor, were paid in full on 
July 5, 2018. (AE H) The delinquency owed to a debt collection agency alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.p has been paid in full in January 2018, after Applicant’s pay was garnished in the 
amount of $100 each pay period. (Tr. 48, AE G) Applicant also produced documents at 
the hearing showing that the small consumer debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t have 
been paid. (AE J) The debt placed for collection by a bank, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.o now 
has a zero balance (AE F) and the medical debt placed for collection as alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.r has been paid in full. (Tr. 41, AE E)   
 
Applicant testified that the $5,976 student-loan debt owed directly to the 
University was supposed to be covered by her ex-husband’s GI bill education benefits. 
(Tr. 66) However, she provided no documentation to show that it was effectively 
disputed or resolved. In Applicant’s Answer, she stated that she dropped out of this 
particular university due to her divorce. The remaining alleged consumer and medical 
delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.m, 1.n, 1.v, 1.w and 1.x have not been resolved. 
Applicant claims in her Answer that these were all debts incurred for their daughter’s 
expenses. Her ex-husband has not paid half as required by their divorce decree.  
 
Applicant’s mother provided a character reference confirming that Applicant went 
through a bitter and expensive divorce and her ex-husband was ordered to pay half of 
their daughter’s medical costs and child support. He failed to do so.  (AE L) Applicant 
has stepped up to help out her mother and step-father financially, and she graduated 
nursing school with a 4.0 grade point average, and honors.  
 
 
4 
 
 
          Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 
5 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding information. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the government’s exhibits support the following AG ¶ 
19 disqualifying conditions:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted to owing the delinquent student loan debts alleged in the SOR 
totaling approximately $81,000. These make up the majority of her total delinquent debt. 
They are her individual debts. She provided post-hearing documents to show a payment  
plan with DOE on her consolidated student loans. However, this plan was entered into a 
few months before the hearing and no evidence of a stream of $61 payments pursuant 
to the plan has been offered. These longstanding debts are evidenced by her most 
recent credit bureau report. She has endured a long, expensive divorce and she is a 
single mother. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that she disputed many of 
the debts, but submitted no dispute letters to show that she corresponded with, or 
negotiated with her creditors. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she intended to mitigate or pay 
her debts. Intentions to pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of 
debt repayment or other responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 
(App. Bd. Oct 23, 2013). She has made great strides in paying off some of the minor 
consumer debts, and she recently entered into an eleventh-hour payment plan with 
DOE. However, these efforts are too little, too late. Insufficient time has passed to 
confidently conclude that she will continue to make payments. Otherwise, she produced 
inadequate documentation to show payments or progress on any of her delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. The delinquencies alleged in the SOR are longstanding and 
ongoing. Her divorce was a condition beyond Applicant’s control. She has not 
demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She provided no 
evidence of financial counseling or a budget to show that her financial problems have 
been resolved and are under control. Applicant made only minimal good-faith efforts to 
repay creditors. The mitigating conditions enumerated above at ¶ 20(b) and ¶ 20(d) 
have only partial application. Otherwise, none of the mitigating conditions enumerated 
above apply.   
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant is a single mother of a twelve-year old 
child, and she supports her infirm parents. She deserves great credit for working full 
time while educating herself. She has endured an expensive divorce and struggled 
through a downturn in the economy.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:                         Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.n:                        Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.v – 1.x:                        Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.j, 1.o, and 1.p:             For Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.u:                        For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 
8 
 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a  public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
