 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00503 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 On April 10, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 26, 
2018. Applicant received the FORM on July 12, 2018. Applicant had 30 days to submit 
a response to the FORM. She did not submit a response to the FORM. On September 
12, 2018, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on 
September 25, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a DOD contractor since July 2014. She 
previously held a secret security clearance while working for a DOD contractor in 2005. 
She is reapplying for a security clearance. Her highest level of education is a master’s 
degree. She is married and has three children, a son, age 31, and two daughters, ages 
29 and 22. Her husband is retired from the U.S. Navy. (Item 3) 
 
On April 13, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing. (Item 3) A subsequent background investigation revealed 
Applicant had five delinquent debts which make up the SOR allegations. The debts 
include a student loan with a balance of $98,415 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 4 at 3; Item 5 at 2); a student loan with a balance of $89,131 that was placed 
for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 3; Item 5 at 2); a $5,210 buying club account that 
was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 13); a $1,175 account that was placed 
for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 4 at 13); and a $1,151 cell phone account that was 
placed for collection. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 13).  
 
In her Response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b 
and 1.d. She denies the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. The debts alleged in SOR 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d are delinquent student loans. Applicant attempted to resolve 
this debt by applying for loan forgiveness. She also applied to different loan reduction 
programs which did not properly manage her loans. She has made some payments and 
has applied for deferments. Her last attempt to resolve the student loans was with a 
company that told her that they would begin repayment based on her income. She was 
not earning a lot of income at the time so she usually sent the company $25 a month. 
She provided a receipt indicating she sent $299 to the company on November 25, 2013. 
She later discovered the company was not repaying her student loans so she 
discontinued her agreement with the company. Applicant believes that she will be able 
to resolve her student loans now that she has good employment. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant disputes the $5,210 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c because she claims the 
original creditor conducted predatory practices towards military families. She claims 
they deceived her and her husband during a demonstration. They took their information, 
including their credit card number stating they were under no obligation. The company 
began billing them each month. Applicant and her husband cancelled the payments and 
notified the company that they did not agree to their services. They discovered other 
military friends had similar experiences with the company. The company has since 
closed down. Applicant disputes this debt because the company fraudulently billed her 
for nothing. The debt is not listed on her most recent credit report. (Item 2; Item 5)  
 
Applicant disputes the $1,151 cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. She claims 
she was a long-term customer of the cell phone company, but they were no longer able 
to provide cell phone service after 13 years. The cell phone company told Applicant they 
were going to disconnect the lines. When they disconnected the lines, the cell phone 
company continued to charge her for cell phone service. She claims she paid all of the 
 
3 
 
 
debt owed to the cell phone company and will not pay for a debt that she does not owe. 
She did not provide documentation indicating that she submitted a formal dispute of the 
debt either directly with the company or with the credit reporting agencies. The debt is 
not listed on her most recent credit report. (Item 2; Item 5)   
  
 Applicant has had two periods of unemployment. The first occurred from July 
2007 to March 2008. The second occurred from January to March 2013.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Both disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant incurred five delinquent 
accounts, an approximate total of $195,082. Of that amount, $188,721 consists of 
delinquent student loans.    
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
 
5 
 
 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The concern under Financial Considerations is broader than the possibility that a 
person might knowingly compromise classified information to obtain money or 
something else of value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, 
judgment, and other important qualities.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
financial counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant had two periods of unemployment which 
may have had an impact on her finances. However, I cannot conclude she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances because she has not demonstrated that she has a 
consistent plan to resolve her delinquent student loans. Applicant currently has 
 
6 
 
 
approximately $188,721 in delinquent student loans. She has provided insufficient 
evidence of the steps she is taking to resolve the student loan accounts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e.  
Although Applicant did not provide proof that she formally disputed the debts, her 
explanation is credible and the debts are not listed on her most recent credit report.  
 
The security concerns raised about Applicant’s financial situation are not 
mitigated because of the unresolved student loan debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered Applicant’s 
employment history to include her two periods of unemployment. Applicant has not 
demonstrated that she has a consistent plan to resolve her delinquent student loans. 
The security concerns raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.e:     For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
