 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00552 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jessica R.K. Dorman, Esq., Claery & Hammond, LLP 
 
 
September 18, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On November 13, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  (Government Exhibit 1.) On March 16, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (CEO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 16, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2018, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 7, 2018. The Government offered eight 
 
2 
 
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered twelve exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A 
through L, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant called three witness and 
testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 
15, 2016. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 49 years old and unmarried.  He has a high school diploma and 
some college.  He is employed by a defense contractor is a Simulator Technician II.  He 
is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
 The SOR identified that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in April 
2015 and for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in July 2017.  Credit reports of the Applicant 
dated February 20, 2009; October 24, 2017; December 2, 2017; and May 25, 2018, 
confirm the debts listed in each of the bankruptcies.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, 7 and 
8.)  Applicant has been working for his current employer since November 2016.  He first 
obtained a security clearance in 2008.  (Tr. p. 103.)      
     
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems.  In 2001, his step-mother 
passed away, leaving his elderly father as the primary caregiver of Applicant’s six year 
old sister.  At the time, Applicant’s father was also financially supporting Applicant’s 
brother with schizophrenia, who lives in an assisted living facility.  In 2008-2009, 
Applicant became involved in his father’s finances, as his father started having 
dementia.  Applicant wanted to help provide financial assistance, so he used his credit 
cards to pay medical bills, and obtained personal loans to pay for property taxes, home 
expenses and auto repairs.  Applicant also helped to pay for his younger sister’s private 
school and his older brother’s care in the facility.   As time passed, to continue paying 
for these things, Applicant took out a home equity line of credit (HELOC) on his father’s 
home.  At this point, they also put money aside to cover the costs for Applicant’s father’s 
funeral expenses, a mold repair issue in his bedroom, and the house remodel.  
Applicant’s father was also on the loan, which raised the interest rates, due to his bad 
credit, and Applicant could not afford to pay make the payments.  Applicant stated that 
in 2016 he traveled to Croatia for vacation.  (Tr. p. 133.)         
 
 Applicant testified that his siblings told him that if he did not pay off his father’s 
debts, the trust would have to cover the expenses, and since they hold inheritance 
interests, they did not want to pay for their father’s bills.  (Tr. p. 122-123.)  Applicant 
holds a 25% interest in the trust.   
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is a devoted son and loves his family.  To honor his father, over the 
years, at his own choice, he has tried to be responsible for his father’s debts, while 
neglecting is own debts, knowing that he could not afford it.  Applicant has three older 
brothers and two step-sisters.  None of the other siblings have helped Applicant with 
their father’s expenses.  Applicant’s father passed away in 2014.   
 
 In April 2015 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
Excessive credit-card debt and personal loans Applicant used to help the family in the 
amount of approximately $40,000 were discharged in July 2015.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D 
and Tr. p. 161.)  The only assets that were not discharged were Applicant’s car, his 
student loans, and the mortgage on the house, which still amounted to about $90,000 in 
debt for which Applicant was at that time current.  (Tr. p. 129.)  Applicant received 
financial counseling and debtor education related to this bankruptcy.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibits B and C.)         
 
 Following this Chapter 7 bankruptcy, Applicant was laid off from his job for about 
three or four months.  He again fell behind on the bills.  To consolidate the debt, and to 
obtain a structured payment plan, he filed for Chapter 13 in July 2017.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit E.)  Applicant testified that he is following a five year payment plan and is current 
with his payments.  (Applicant’s Exhibits H, I, J, K, and L, and Tr. p. 139.)  Applicant 
stated that he now realizes that his family has taken advantage of him over the years by 
allowing him to pay for everything instead of providing him with some help.  Applicant 
has incurred no new debts.   He has also received financial counseling and debtor 
education related to this bankruptcy.  (Applicant’s Exhibits F and G.)         
 
 Applicant’s credit history shows that he had financial difficulties even before he 
started trying to help his father with his bills in 2008.  (Tr. pp. 149 -191 and Government 
Exhibits 5, 6, 7 and 8.)  His credit report dated February 20, 2009, reflects numerous 
collection accounts and charge-off accounts.  (Tr. pp. 145 -150.)   
 
 Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf who all met him at church, and 
who are longtime friends and/or coworkers.  The all hold or have held a security 
clearance at some point.  They collectively attest to Applicant’s good judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness, and recommend him for a security clearance.  (Tr. pp. 29 
- 89) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 (e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or non-payment, or other negative 
financial indicators. 
 
 Applicant is a compassionate and kind-hearted man, but he has made bad 
decisions that have negatively affected his financial situation.  Namely, he took on the 
responsibility of paying his father’s expenses, including the expense to help his younger 
sister and disabled brother, even though he could not afford to do so.  Instead of paying 
his own bills, he continued over the years to provide his family with financial support.  
As a result, this effort grew over the years, and resulted in two bankruptcies.  The  
choice was all his.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations is 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
  Recently, Applicant has learned that he was badly taken advantage of by his 
siblings, and although he does not want this situation to happen again, and as he 
testified, he cannot guarantee that it will not.  Applicant’s Chapter 7 in 2015, and his 
current Chapter 13, filed just last year in 2017, reflects that he will be trying to resolve 
his debts for the next five years.  Hopefully, he can afford to follow the payment plan to 
 
6 
 
resolve his debts.  Despite this, there remain many questions about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
