 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00556 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
  
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his deliberate falsification of 
answers to questions in his security clearance application or his false statements to a 
government investigator during a personal subject interview (PSI). Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 4, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access 
to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1. 
 
2 
 
 On April 17, 2018, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns about personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant 
timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On May 30, 
2018, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)2 in support of the 
SOR. Applicant received the FORM on June 5, 2018, and was notified that he had 30 
days to file a response to the FORM, including any objections to the materials relied on 
by the Government. He did not submit any additional information, and the record closed 
on July 5, 2018. The case was assigned to me on September 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately made false official 
statements when, in response to questions in e-QIP Section 12 (Where You Went to 
School), he claimed to have received an associate’s degree in May 2008, when in fact, 
he had not earned that degree (SOR 1.a). It was also alleged that during a PSI on 
November 8, 2017, Applicant attempted to mislead a government investigator when he 
affirmed the false answer he had given in his e-QIP (SOR 1.b). In response to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted, without explanation, both allegations. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) In 
addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He and his wife have been married since August 2007, 
and they have two children, ages 7 and 4. Between August 2006 and May 2008, Applicant 
attended a local community college to study for an associate’s degree in an information 
technology (IT) field. He did not complete his studies for that degree, falling short by two 
or three courses because he ran out of money for tuition. Applicant had told his wife, 
however, that he had obtained his degree and she was very proud of him for doing so. 
When Applicant was completing his e-QIP, his wife helped him complete the automated 
questionnaire. In Section 12, he answered “yes” and listed an associate’s degree because 
his wife could see his answers and he did not want her to know he had been untruthful to 
her. He intended to correct the answer before submitting it, but he never did. (FORM, 
Items 3 and 4) 
 
 Before Applicant’s PSI in November 2017, the government investigator had 
received information from Applicant’s community college pursuant to a routine records 
check. That information showed Applicant had not received a degree. Applicant was 
asked about his incorrect e-QIP answer and initially affirmed his claim of having received 
a degree. He indicated there must be some mistake and that he did not know why school 
records did not show that he had earned a degree. It was not until the investigator 
suggested that a check of school records might contradict Applicant’s claim that he 
admitted intentionally providing a false answer. (FORM, Items 4 and 5) 
  
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included five exhibits (Items 1 – 5) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.5 If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.6 
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
the applicant to have access to protected information.7 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.8 
 
                                                 
3 Directive, 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 Directive, E3.1.14. 
6 Directive, E3.1.15. 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The facts established through the Government’s information, and by Applicant’s 
statements and admissions, reasonably raise a security concern about his personal 
conduct. That security concern is stated at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 Applicant deliberately provided false information in his e-QIP, and he deliberately 
made false statements to a government investigator in his PSI. This information requires 
application of the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying condition:  
  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
5 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Rather than correct his omissions, 
Applicant persisted in his misrepresentations well into the course of his PSI three months 
later. It was not until the prospect of a records check at the school was made apparent to 
him that he admitted his actions. Further, there is nothing minor about Applicant’s 
willingness to provide false and misleading answers to fundamental and reasonable 
questions from the government. Applicant has not presented any information that shows 
why his omissions should not cast doubt on his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
The security concerns under this guideline are not mitigated.   
 
 I have evaluated this record and applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under 
Guideline E. I also have considered the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). This 
record does not present sufficient information to resolve the doubts raised by the 
Government’s information about Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. 
Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus of these 
adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
