 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00502 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 28, 2016. On 
April 3, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 12, 2018, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. On May 30, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 6. He was given 
an opportunity to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation to the Government’s evidence. He received the 
FORM on June 6, 2018, and did not respond. Items 1 and 2 contain the pleadings in the 
 
2 
 
case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
September 12, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant, age 50, divorced in 2003 and has no children. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 1991. He attended graduate courses for two semesters between 1994 and 
1995, but did not earn a degree. He honorably served in the U.S. Army from May 1991 
through July 2001, both as an active and inactive reservist. Applicant has been employed 
as a network operations engineer since 2016. He was offered a position with a defense 
contractor in 2015 that is contingent upon him being granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant has four delinquent debts, including two federal student-loan accounts 
totaling $95,645 and two medical accounts totaling $126.2 Without providing any 
corroborating documents, he disputed the $72 medical debt on the basis that the creditor 
informed him that he did not have an outstanding balance, and the $54 medical debt on 
the basis that he paid it. 
 
Applicant undertook the student loans to help pay for the costs associated with his 
undergraduate degree and graduate courses. He attributed the default of those loans to 
a period that began in 2004, when he fell behind with the payments and never fully caught 
up. The balances have increased over the years due to penalties and interest. In his SCA 
and during his background investigation interview, Applicant claimed that he began 
making payments on the loans after he left school but, due to periods of employment, he 
stopped paying at times. He also asserted that he applied for one or more forbearances 
and made intermittent payments whenever he could afford them. Applicant averred that 
his income tax refunds have been applied towards the balance owed, and that he had 
resumed regular direct payments after a 2013 loan consolidation. Applicant did not 
provide any documents to corroborate payments, forbearances, the refunds applied, or 
any other indicia that his student-loan debts are being paid or otherwise resolved (despite 
being given opportunities to do so during his background investigation and in his response 
to the FORM).3 
 
Between 2005 and 2016, Applicant was unemployed twice: once between May 
2007 and June 2008 after a layoff by his employer of eight months; and again, from 
November 2015 through May 2016 after he was fired by his employer of six years for 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from Applicant’s 
SOR answer (Item 2), his SCA (Item 3), and the summary of his November 2016 security clearance 
interview (Item 4). Item 4 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. However, Applicant 
was informed by Department Counsel that he was entitled to make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
updates to Item 4. Applicant was also informed that he was entitled to object to consideration of Item 4 on 
the ground that it was not authenticated. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Therefore, I conclude that 
he has waived any objection to Item 4. 
 
2 Items 5 and 6. 
 
3 Item 4 at 8 and 10.  
 
 
3 
 
reasons that he disputed.4 The record does not address his employment history prior to 
2005. Applicant assessed his current financial status as stable and has neither sought 
nor received any financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”6 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”7 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”8 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 4 at 2-4. 
 
5 Item 4 at 8-9. 
 
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
7 Egan at 527. 
 
8 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
9 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.10 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”11 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.12 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.13 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.14 
  
 An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”15 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”16 
 
Analysis 
 
 The concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
                                                          
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
13 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
16 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.17  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports establish two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline.18 He has not provided evidence to support any of the potentially 
applicable mitigating factors.19 Not only did he fail to pay two relatively minor medical 
debts, but he owes substantial student-loan debts to the federal government. Therefore, 
I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his failure to 
pay delinquent debts. In reaching this decision, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d).20  
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
18 AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
  
19 AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated 
and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). 
 
20 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
