 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00103 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 8, 2016. On 
January 31, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 17, 2018, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on May 18, 2018. On the same day, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 11, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. I kept the record open until June 25, 2018, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX C and D, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 20, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he commented on each of the allegations but 
did not expressly admit or deny them. I have treated his answers as denials.  
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old field service technician employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2016. He has worked for federal contractors for about 28 
years. (Tr. 19, 75.) He stated in his SCA that he had never received a security 
clearance. However, he testified that he received a security clearance in 2016 and a 
“red badge” from his current employer (probably an interim clearance), and that he 
previously held a clearance in 2003. (Tr. 7, 76; GX 1 at 39.) 
 
Applicant married in June 2002 and divorced in July 2009. He married his current 
spouse in July 2011. He has two adult children from previous relationships and four 
stepchildren, ages 31, 28, 25, and 14. 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 arrests and use of marijuana from about 1980 to at least 
2013. The arrests and marijuana use are alleged as personal conduct under Guideline 
E but are not cross-alleged under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse) or J (Criminal Conduct). The evidence concerning each of the allegations in the 
SOR is summarized below. The allegations are discussed in chronological order rather 
than the order in the SOR, except for SOR ¶ 1.l, which is discussed last. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k: arrested in October 1983 and charged with felony aggravated 
sexual battery. Applicant testified that he was arrested after his ex-wife’s sister 
accused him of making “an advance” to her, but she later admitted that her accusation 
was false. (Tr. 37-37.) The court records do not reflect the disposition of this arrest. (GX 
2 at 1.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: arrested in July 1984 and charged with felony abduction and 
assault. Applicant testified that he was arrested on a weekend when he was scheduled 
for visitation with his daughter. His daughter’s mother resisted his efforts to take his 
daughter, and he pulled his daughter away from her and left. He was accused of 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
kidnapping his daughter and assaulting his daughter’s mother.2 (Tr. 37-38.) The 
charges were dismissed. (GX 2 at 1.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: arrested in October 2004 and charged with contempt of court. 
The court records reflect that Applicant was fined. (GX 2 at 1-2.) At the hearing, 
Applicant was unable to provide any information about this arrest. (Tr. 39.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: arrested in June 2005 and charged with felony breaking and 
entering with intent to commit a felony, trespassing, and using profane or 
threatening language over a public airway. The court records do not reflect the 
disposition of the felony charge of breaking and entering. Applicant testified that he was 
charged breaking and entering after he was in an argument with his ex-wife, talking 
from the outside of her cousin’s house through a window, and during the argument he 
pulled down an exterior storm window and broke it. He was not arrested at the scene, 
but he later learned that there was a warrant for his arrest, and he turned himself in. He 
testified he was convicted and sentenced to seven days in jail, which he completed on 
weekends, and placed on probation for a year. (Tr. 40.) 
 
The court records reflect that Applicant also was convicted of trespassing, a 
misdemeanor, and sentenced to 12 months in jail, with 11 months suspended, and 
placed on unsupervised probation. He was convicted of the profane-language offense 
and sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended, and unsupervised probation. (GX 2 at 
2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: arrested in September 2005 and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI), assault and battery, felony by eluding police department and 
endangering a person or police car, and felony hit-and-run resulting in personal 
injury. Applicant testified that this incident occurred after he and his ex-wife had a 
telephonic argument. He decided to drive to his father’s house after the argument, and 
his ex-wife crossed his path and was driving in front of him. He followed her to his 
father’s house, and his ex-wife called the police. Applicant backed out the driveway and 
hit his ex-wife’s car, but he kept on driving until he was stopped by another police car in 
a parking lot. (Tr. 44-45.) He was convicted of DUI and sentenced to 12 months in jail, 
with 11 months suspended, and placed on unsupervised probation. He was convicted of 
assault and battery on a family member and sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended. 
He was convicted of eluding the police, but no sentence is reflected in the court records. 
He was convicted of a hit-and-run resulting in personal injury and property damage, and 
sentenced to 12 months in jail, suspended. (GX 2 at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: arrested in January 2006 and charged with violating a protective 
order. Applicant violated a protective order by calling his wife on the telephone. (Tr. 48.) 
He was convicted and sentenced to 12 months in jail, with 11 months and 20 days 
suspended. (GX 2 at 3.) 
                                                          
2 Applicant referred to his daughter’s mother as his wife, but his SCA does not reflect that he was married 
in 1984.  
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: arrested in February 2007 for using profane and threatening 
language over a public airway. Applicant was involved in a conversation with a “friend 
of a friend.” The conversation “got a little out of control,” and profanities were 
exchanged. (Tr. 49.) Applicant was convicted, but the court records do not reflect a 
sentence. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: arrested in June 2007 and charged with assault and battery on a 
family member. Applicant was arrested for grabbing his 20-year-old son, who was 
living with Applicant and had brought a woman to Applicant’s home for the night. 
Applicant told his son to pack his belongings and move out. His son called the police, 
who arrested Applicant. (Tr. 50-51.) The charges were nolle prosequi. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: arrested in May 2009 and charged with assault and battery. 
Applicant testified that this arrest occurred after he told a woman with whom had a 
relationship that he wanted to terminate the relationship. He asked her to leave his 
home, and she refused. He suggested that they go outside and talk on the front porch, 
but when she stepped outside he closed the door and locked her out. She called the 
police and accused Applicant of assaulting her. When the case went to trial, the woman 
recanted her accusation. (Tr. 53-54.) The charges were dismissed. (GX 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: arrested in May 2012 and charged with assault on family 
member. This arrest, as well as the May 2009 and June 2007 arrests arose after loud 
arguments. On this occasion, Applicant and his wife had a loud argument outside their 
home and then went inside. A neighbor called the police and reported that they were 
having a physical altercation. (Tr. 54-56.) Applicant was found not guilty. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: arrested in April 2013 for drunk in public, violation of protective 
order, and trespass. Applicant testified that his wife obtained a protective order after 
an argument. Applicant admitted that he tends to be “boisterous” and a “little 
intimidating,” but he denied any physical contact. After his wife obtained the protective 
order, he contacted her and told her that he intended to go to the marital home and 
gather his tools and some clothing. A neighbor saw him and called the police. He 
testified that his misunderstood the protective order and thought it required him to stay 
away from his wife but did not prevent him from being on the property. (Tr. 20-21, 56-
57.) Applicant was convicted in absentia of being drunk in public and fined $250. The 
trespassing charge was dismissed. The court records do not reflect a disposition of the 
charge of violating a protective order.   
 
Applicant testified that he was intoxicated when the arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a-1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i-1.j occurred. He testified that at his trial following his April 2013 
arrest, the judge offered him an opportunity to enter a rehabilitation program, which 
included treatment for substance abuse. He testified that he told the judge, “[Y]ou gave 
me an opportunity, and I will make sure that you don’t have to worry about seeing me 
anymore.” (Tr. 65.)  
 
 
5 
 
Applicant entered the rehabilitation program in May 2013 and completed it in 
September 2013. (AX C; AX D; Tr. 22.) He testified that, unlike earlier treatment 
programs, he took this one seriously and stopped drinking. (Tr. 22-23.) He had 
completed a four-week rehabilitation program in January 2006, but he did not stop 
drinking after completing that program. (Tr. 46-47.) Although he has never been 
diagnosed by a medical professional as having an alcohol use disorder, he believes that 
he is an alcoholic. (Tr. 73.) He has not consumed alcohol since he entered the 
rehabilitation program in 2013. (Tr. 72.) He attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings while in the rehabilitation program. He realized that he had “given up on 
[himself],” that alcohol and marijuana were causing his behavior and disrupting his 
home life, and that he needed to change the way he dealt with problems. (Tr. 35.) He 
did not continue AA attendance after he completed the rehabilitation program, but he 
found a friend with similar alcohol-related problems, and they routinely call each other 
when they are “feeling a certain way about things.” (Tr. 62-63.)  
 
Applicant and his wife have attended multiple sessions of marriage counseling 
from church-related providers and are determined to change their methods of resolving 
disagreements. (Tr. 26.) He testified that marriage counseling was “an eye opener” for 
him. Their most recent marriage counseling was about six months before the hearing. 
(Tr. 69.) His wife did not testify, but she attended the hearing to provide moral support 
for him. (Tr. 5.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: used marijuana, with varying frequency, from about 1980 to at 
least 2013. Applicant disclosed in his SCA that he first used marijuana in June 1980 
and used it “every now and then with friends.” (GX 1 at 35-36.) At the hearing, he 
testified that he used marijuana two or three times a month, and that after 2005, his 
usage was “pretty frequent,” not daily but at least weekly. (Tr. 31.) He stopped using it in 
May 2013, when he entered the substance-abuse program.  
 
 A former employer submitted a letter supporting Applicant’s effort to obtain a 
security clearance. The former employer states that Applicant worked for him in 2009 
and is a caring and considerate person and a hard worker who was willing to work extra 
hours to take care of customers. (AX B.) The commissioner of a youth athletic 
association, who has known Applicant for 20 years, states that he is well known for his 
work ethic, positive attitude, teamwork mentality, and leadership. He states that 
Applicant “is well respected throughout the organization for dedication to teaching 
young men discipline, perseverance, and manhood [while] learning the fundamentals of 
football, basketball, and baseball.” (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
6 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-
01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .” The evidence summarized 
above is insufficient to establish the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.j, and 1.k. 
However, the evidence is sufficient to establish the remaining allegations in the SOR 
and to raise the following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . (2) any 
disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; [and] (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; 
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing . . . ;  
 
AG ¶ 16(f): violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(g); association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) are established by the evidence of Applicant’s 
alcohol-related and drug-related misconduct. AG ¶ 16(f) is not established, because 
there is no evidence that Applicant’s purchase, possession, and use of marijuana 
violated any “written or recorded commitment” to his employers “as a condition of 
 
8 
 
employment” between 1980 and 2013. However, AG ¶ 16(g) is established by his 
association with drug users and drug sellers. 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
AG ¶ 17(f): the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g): association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. 
 AG ¶ 17(a), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g) are established. Some of Applicant’s 
offenses, such as the use of profane language alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, were minor. All of 
Applicant’s conduct was alcohol-related and occurred more than five years ago, before 
he decided to take a rehabilitation program seriously. He no longer consumes alcohol, 
uses marijuana, or associates with persons involved with drugs. He has openly 
disclosed his past misconduct and has reformed his behavior to eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He is actively involved in his community and 
enjoys an outstanding reputation as a role model in youth athletic activities. AG ¶ 17(f) 
is applicable to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.j, and 1.k, which are not 
supported by substantial evidence. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
9 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant was candid, sincere, remorseful, and 
credible at the hearing. He and his wife decided in 2013 to change past behavioral 
patterns and to support each other. They have received extensive marriage counseling 
and are actively working to preserve and strengthen their marriage in an alcohol-free 
and drug-free environment. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline E and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
