 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00279 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Available information is not sufficient to overcome the security concerns raised by 
the Government’s adverse information about Applicant’s financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 28, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information. After reviewing the completed background investigation, adjudicators at the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not 
determine that it was clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have access to classified information.1 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On February 16, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
decision without a hearing. On April 23, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support 
of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 3, 2018, and was informed he had 30 
days from the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM 
and to submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on 
June 2, 2018, after Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I received this case for 
decision on September 19, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes 
$451,230 for seven delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.g). Of those debts, the 
mortgage account addressed at SOR 1.b constitutes about 92 percent of the total 
indebtedness at issue. The debts alleged at SOR 1.c – 1.e are for delinquent child support 
accounts totaling $13,416. Additionally, the SOR alleged that Applicant filed for Chapter 
13 bankruptcy protection in March 2017, and that the petition was dismissed three months 
later for failing to file all of the documents required by the bankruptcy court. Applicant 
admitted, with explanations, all of the SOR allegations. He also provided documentation 
in support of his responses to SOR 1.b – 1.f. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) 
 
 The SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions in his Answer, and 
by the Government’s documents. In addition to the facts thus established, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since June 2016. Applicant has never been married, but has one child, age 12, 
for whom he is obligated to pay monthly child support. Since early 2000, Appellant has 
been employed by several different federal contractors, with seven periods of 
unemployment lasting between two months (in 2007) and seven months (in 2000 and 
2001). His most recent period of unemployment was between March 2011 and June 
2011. Applicant first received a security clearance in June 1998. (FORM, Items 3 and 8) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he did not disclose any adverse financial 
information. Credit reports obtained by government investigators and by DOD CAF 
adjudicators during the ensuing background investigation documented the allegations at 
SOR 1.b – 1.h. Applicant discussed those debts during a personal subject interview with 
a government investigator on February 9, 2017, and he attributed his financial problems 
to an unspecified period of unemployment. (FORM, Items 2, 6 – 8) 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on eight enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 8). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
  As to SOR 1.a, a state tax lien entered against Applicant, he claims he has made 
arrangements with the state tax authority to make payments on that debt, with other 
unsatisfied portions recouped through diversion of any state tax refunds to which he might 
be entitled. He did not otherwise document his claim in this regard. This debt remains 
unresolved. 
 
 The mortgage debt addressed in SOR 1.b was in forbearance as of the date of the 
SOR. That meant that the mortgage lender had agreed not to foreclose on the mortgage 
pending a loan modification. To that end, as alleged in SOR 1.h, Applicant filed a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy petition in March 2017 for the sole purpose of obtaining an automatic stay 
of any foreclosure actions being contemplated by the lender. The automatic stay of 
foreclosure implemented by the bankruptcy court was lifted in May 2017 when the 
Chapter 13 petition was dismissed. Applicant submitted information with his Answer that 
shows a loan modification was agreed upon at the beginning of this year; however, he 
did not present information in response to the FORM that shows he has been making 
payments as required by the new mortgage. (FORM, Items 2 and 5) 
 
 The child support debts alleged at SOR 1.c – 1.e have been in repayment since at 
least October 2017. Applicant acknowledged that some of the money he pays each month 
is allocated to his arrearage, and he characterized those debts as still delinquent. The 
report of his payments submitted with his Answer lists the accounts as “current.” The total 
of the three accounts has increased to $15,122. It is not clear from this record if 
Applicant’s payments are garnishments or if he initiated a repayment plan of his own 
volition. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 The debt at SOR 1.f is for a delinquent student loan. Applicant claims to have 
established a repayment plan by which he pays $135 each month. The information he 
provided to document his claim shows that as of March 28, 2018, he was a month behind 
in his payments. He also did not establish when the plan began. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
 Applicant also claimed that he has established a repayment plan to satisfy the debt 
at SOR 1.g. The only information regarding this claim shows Applicant paid $136 on 
January 10, 2018, but it did not identify the payee or provide any other information about 
Applicant’s repayment activity. (FORM, Item 2) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
 
4 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has experienced significant financial difficulty over the past few years. 
He has accrued unpaid taxes, he has missed mortgage and child support payments, and 
has other unmet financial obligations. This information requires application of the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations).  
 
In response, Applicant claimed that his financial problems were caused by 
unemployment; however, his last known period of unemployment ended in June 2011, 
more than seven years ago. Applicant is credited with taking action to save his house 
from foreclosure and obtaining a mortgage modification, but he did not establish that he 
is making payments as required under the new agreement. As to child support, he showed 
that payments are being made, but it is reasonable to conclude that his pay is being 
garnished to satisfy what appears to be a growing child support arrearage. The state tax 
lien remains unresolved, and Applicant did not support his claim of actions taken to satisfy 
this debt. The information submitted regarding his student loans and one other 
delinquency do not show a consistent, reliable effort to repay those debts. 
 
In summary, Applicant did not produce any information that warrants consideration 
of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. He did not mitigate the security concerns 
under this guideline raised by the Government’s information. 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s information did not 
resolve the doubts about his suitability for access to classified information that were raised 
by his financial problems. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
