 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02438 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 14, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 9, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 4-10 and is admitted into the record (Items 
1-3 are pleadings and transmittal documents). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who 
received it on October 19, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted an undated 
response to the FORM, which was admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 
A. The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all but one of the allegations. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.1 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 1997. He 
is divorced and has three children, ages 15, 18, and 20. He has a bachelor’s degree. He 
has no military experience.2  
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR included: a history of consuming alcohol, 
at times, to excess from 1974 to about April 2014; being found guilty for operating under 
the influence of alcohol (OUI) in February 1991; being found guilty for OUI 2nd in 
November 1997; and being found guilty for OUI 3rd in November 2010 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
- 1.d).3 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was approximately 15 years old in 
1974. He drinks beer on most occasions. Even after his OUI convictions, he stated he 
was still was consuming two to three beers a week. He drinks in social settings and 
after hockey games. As a result of his 2010 OUI conviction, he lost his driver’s license 
for five years. He completed his probation in May 2015.4 
 
 Court documents establish that Applicant was found guilty of three OUI offenses, 
in 1992 (1991 arrest), 2000 (1997 arrest), and 2012 (2010 arrest). He was placed on 
probation in each instance.5 
 
 In February 1991, Applicant was driving home from a friend’s house where he 
consumed about four beers. He was stopped by a police officer who had observed 
Applicant’s car cross over the center line. Applicant was given, and failed, a field 
sobriety test. He was taken into the police station where he refused a breathalyzer test. 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
4 Item 10; AE A. 
 
5 Item 7, 9; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
He was charged with OUI and later pleaded guilty. He was required to attend 12 weeks 
of alcohol education and counseling classes, which he completed.6 
 
 In November 1997, Applicant was going home from a high school football game 
when he was stopped in traffic by a police officer. Applicant had two beers before the 
game and shared a flask containing some kind of alcohol at the game. The officer 
apparently asked Applicant if he had been drinking and Applicant answered 
affirmatively. He was then given field sobriety tests, which he failed. He was arrested, 
taken back to the police station and given a breathalyzer test, which he also failed. He 
was found guilty of OUI and sentenced to two years’ probation, loss of his driver’s 
license for six months, and 12 weeks required attendance at alcohol education and 
counseling classes.7 
 
 In November 2010, Applicant was driving back from a hockey tournament and 
was stopped by a state patrolman because he crossed the center line. Applicant had 
consumed six beers and shared a flask of whiskey at the hockey tournament. He failed 
the field sobriety tests and was almost incoherent to the patrolman. He was arrested 
and taken to a police station where he was offered a breathalyzer test. He was unable 
to properly perform the test, which was deemed a refusal to take the test. He was found 
guilty of OUI and sentenced to six months’ incarceration, five years of probation, loss of 
driver’s license for five years, and mandatory substance abuse evaluation and 
treatment.8 
 
 The court-ordered substance abuse treatment involved two mandatory sessions 
and Applicant voluntarily attended six more sessions. He failed to provide 
documentation of any evaluation done by the counselors, but Applicant stated he was 
diagnosed as being an alcohol abuser. Applicant also attended Alcohol Anonymous 
(AA) meetings once every six to eight weeks. He last attended an AA meeting in May 
2015. He continued to drink an occasional beer every few months. In May 2015, at an 
AA meeting he heard a story had made him decide to stop drinking alcohol entirely. He 
claims he has not had any alcohol since that time.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Item 10. 
 
7 Item 10. 
 
8 Items 7, 10. 
 
9 Item 6-10; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant’s three OUI convictions and his drinking history support the application 
of both disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 Applicant’s last adverse alcohol incident occurred in November 2010 and he 
came off probation for that offense in May 2015. His three OUI convictions are not 
infrequent under these circumstances. Insufficient attenuation exists to conclude 
enough time has passed since his last alcohol-related incident. His history of OUI 
arrests and convictions under similar circumstances suggest that recurrence is a 
possibility. His current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are in doubt. AG ¶ 
23(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant recently decided to totally abstain from using alcohol. He indicated that 
he has abstained since May 2015. While this is a commendable start, it is too soon to 
determine whether his abstinence will continue to be part of his life or whether he will 
use alcohol responsibly in the future. AG ¶ 23(b) partially applies.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances that 
led to his arrests and his current state of abstinence. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline G. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
