 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------    )  ISCR Case No. 11-07728 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges two allegations under Guideline 
K (handling protected information) and five allegations under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). All allegations relate to his handling of confidential data in December 2007 
and January 2008 and his participation in the follow-up investigation in 2009 and 2010. 
Applicant was assured that “trusted downloads” provided by the Navy and Company L 
did not contain classified information, when two of them contained a mix of unclassified 
and classified information. Applicant and his team members transferred the trusted 
downloads onto computers that were for unclassified use only. There was no evidence 
that any of the classified information was viewed by anyone not authorized to view it. 
Applicant made some judgment errors in his reaction to the discovery of the classified 
information. In March 2008, Applicant’s attorney offered to provide requested materials 
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); Applicant cooperated with the investigation; 
and Applicant’s errors in judgment are not recent. He credibly assured conscientious 
compliance with security rules. He presented a strong case of whole-person mitigation. 
Security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On February 11, 2011, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 1) On August 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order 
 
2 
                                         
 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) Specifically, the SOR set forth security 
concerns arising under Guidelines K and E.   
  
On September 2, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a 
hearing. On July 23, 2015, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On July 30, 
2015, the case was assigned to me. On November 12, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for 
December 14, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. On December 7, 2015, 
Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. There was no 
objection, and I granted the motion. During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
seven exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection, and Applicant 
offered 18 exhibits, which were admitted without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 17-21; 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1-7; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-R) On December 22, 2015, I 
received a transcript of the hearing.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he denied all of the SOR allegations. Applicant 
admitted the information in amended SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old software engineer employed by Company D, a defense 
contractor from 1980 to 2007. (Tr. 179, 214; AE A) From 2008 to present, he has been 
employed by another defense contractor. (AE A) In January 2011, Applicant’s security 
clearance was suspended. (GE 2; AE E)  
 
In 1998, Applicant married. (Tr. 235) His spouse is a missile engineer, and she 
has a security clearance. (Tr. 216) He has two daughters who are 14 and 15. (Tr. 215) 
His father was a career Navy officer. (Tr. 215) His two older brothers served in the 
Navy. (Tr. 215) His nephew was a Navy Seal, who served three tours in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 215) Applicant never served in the military. (Tr. 235) 
 
Company D funded Applicant’s college tuition, and in 1982, Applicant received a 
bachelor of science degree in mathematics. (Tr. 178-179, 235; AE A) After 1982, 
Applicant worked on a variety of Navy contracts for Company D.  Sometimes he was 
employed at Company D, but detailed to work on Company L managed projects. (Tr. 
180) During Desert Shield, he was deployed for six months to the Persian Gulf aboard a 
U.S. Navy vessel. (Tr. 180) 
 
3 
                                         
 
In 1999, Applicant was one of the architects of a program for a simulation test of 
part of a weapons system developed by Company L by utilizing unclassified data. (Tr. 
184; GE 5; GE 6) From 1999 to 2007, Applicant was instrumental in the program 
development. (Tr. 184-189). In November 2007, Applicant went to the Pentagon, and in 
the presence of an admiral, was shown some design charts, which Applicant had 
developed on behalf of Company D, and Company L had previously presented without 
authorization to the Navy. (Tr. 189) Applicant believed the information was improperly 
taken from Company D by Company L.  
 
Handling Protected Information and Personal Conduct1  
 
Applicant was the leader of a team of technicians working on a Navy project. (Tr. 
99; GE 5 at 1-2) On about 75 occasions over several years, Company L employees or 
Navy personnel provided “trusted downloads” on flash drives or compact discs, which 
were supposed to be unclassified data or software that Applicant and his team could 
use for analysis. (Tr. 94, 99-103; GE 6 at 7) Technicians were concerned that a file 
marked unclassified might actually contain classified data. (Tr. 87) The only way 
classified information could be placed on unclassified computers was through an error 
in the trusted-download process, or a deliberate improper transfer of classified 
information. (Tr. 78) Applicant was not authorized to make a trusted download, and he 
denied knowingly transferring classified information to an unclassified computer. (Tr. 78)  
There are eight or nine people that could have been responsible for entering data that 
was too close to the thresholds to be unclassified. (Tr. 214) 
 
Applicant’s team’s project utilized a classified version and an unclassified version 
of a computer program. The classified version used “a set of parameters, thresholds, 
which [were] put together along with the executable part of the program” to generate a 
“classified result.” (Tr. 100, 107) The classified numbers changed as the project 
advanced. (Tr. 122-123) M was a key person in deciding whether data should be 
classified or not. (Tr. 128) The unclassified version of the program used numbers that 
were not representative of the real system to simulate interactions, which allowed use of 
laptops and communications in an unclassified environment and improved productivity. 
(Tr. 100-101, 107) The non-representative numbers were used “to test the mechanics of 
the program” and debug problems in an unclassified environment. (Tr. 108) The 
classified numbers were not supposed to be used on unclassified computers. (Tr. 112) 
M assumed the computer he was issued was from Company L and not from DOD. (Tr. 
113) The unclassified versions could be used at home. (Tr. 100-102) Employees were 
allowed to use company-issued computers for some personal use; however, extensive 
personal use was discouraged. (Tr. 124) At Company L, if a spillage was discovered, 
Company L’s facility security officer (FSO) was supposed to be notified. (Tr. 115) The 
FSO was responsible for ensuring the file was deleted from computers. (Tr. 116) After 
deletion of the file, security used a cleaning program to scramble the computer memory. 
                                            
1Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this section is a December 16, 2010, 
letter from an FBI special agent written to the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) about 
the investigation of Applicant for unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or material 
in possible violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1924. (GE 3)   
 
4 
                                         
 
(Tr. 116) Applicant had access to classified versions of the program and classified 
program data. (Tr. 118) 
 
Employees of Companies D and L sought to maintain separation between the 
classified and unclassified versions. (Tr. 101, 106-108) In 2008, the security people 
interviewed employees and borrowed computers with the programs on their computers 
to check for a data spill. (Tr. 102) Security found files containing classified information 
on the computers of four to seven employees of Company L, including on M’s computer. 
(Tr. 102-103, 118-121) Security performed cleansing operations on the computers to 
eliminate the files with classified information. (Tr. 102-103, 118-121) Because of the 
spillage, the whole unclassified-simulation program was terminated, and all future 
simulation work was done on the classified side. (Tr. 119, 124) Team members worked 
on different areas of the program. (Tr. 104-105) Their work would be subsequently 
merged, which could cause classified data to be unknowingly transferred from one 
computer to another, and no one would know the origin of the classified information. (Tr. 
104-105)      
 
In December 2007, Applicant received a trusted download onto a flash drive from 
the Navy for evaluation of Applicant and his team. (Tr. 221; GE 5; GE 6) The 
information was supposed to unclassified. Classified files from downloads were labeled 
with a C, and unclassified files from trusted downloads were labeled with a T for test. 
(Tr. 192) In December 2007, B, a GS-13, who was the senior Navy employee on the 
team, was at Applicant’s residence, when they were doing some computer work. (Tr. 
92, 192) Applicant inserted a flash drive into B’s laptop computer and was surprised to 
see a file starting with a C, which meant the file could be classified. (Tr. 193, 217-218; 
GE 5 at 2) Applicant had previously transferred the data from the flash drive to his DOD-
issued laptop computer without noticing the C-file. (Tr. 217) Applicant and B reviewed 
the content of the C-file and determined it was too “inchoate” and lacked a specification 
to be classified. (Tr. 193) Nothing inside the C-file was marked classified, and the 
content of the C-file never made it into a specification. (Tr. 193-194)  
 
In December 2007, the information from the flash drive would have been 
classified; however, by 2015, it was clear that at most it was sensitive information. (Tr. 
194, 220; GE 5 at 2) In 2007, the classification level for the data found on Applicant’s 
computer was probably confidential. (GE 6 at 4) B and Applicant agreed that the file 
should be deleted, and B suggested that Applicant download a cleaning program to be 
sure it was deleted. (Tr. 193; GE 4 at 2; GE 6 at 2) They deleted the file. (Tr. 162) 
Applicant obtained a cleaning program, which wipes out inactive files. (Tr. 195-196)2 It 
deletes files from the recycle bin. (Tr. 224) Applicant conceded it was bad judgment to 
delete the file without going to security. (Tr. 195, 235) Applicant has never had any 
security violations. (Tr. 195) Applicant did not disclose the possible transfer of classified 
information to an unclassified system until August 19, 2010 when he met with an 
                                            
2Applicant is not the only team member with a clearing program on his DOD-issued computer. C 
has a cleaning or deletion program on his computer. (Tr. 80) C understood that if classified information 
were found on an unclassified computer the safest reaction is to delete the classified information to 
ensure its protection from loss or compromise. (Tr. 80-81) The spillage should also be reported to the 
FSO. (Tr. 85-86) 
 
5 
                                         
 
Assistant U.S. Attorney (AUSA) and others for a proffer session. Applicant promised to 
report any spillage that occurs immediately to his company (FSO). (Tr. 214)   
 
On January 18, 2008, two employees of a rival defense contractor (Company L) 
told investigators that Applicant may be responsible for the unauthorized removal and 
retention of classified materials. (GE 4) 
 
On January 28, 2008, Company D’s FSO called Applicant and asked him to 
provide his two DOD-issued laptop computers to Company L. (Tr. 196, 229) One of the 
requested laptop computers was at Applicant’s home. (Tr. 197-199) The FSO did not 
explain why the computers were requested. (Tr. 199) Applicant said he would bring the 
computers the next day, and the FSO did not insist or demand that Applicant provide 
the computer sooner. (GE 6 at 6) Applicant did not believe there had been classified 
information on the laptop computers. (Tr. 200) Applicant said he deleted some family 
pictures and other personal information that he did not want to release. (Tr. 139-140, 
162-163, 169-170, 202, 227-229) On January 29, 2008, Applicant turned in the two 
laptop computers. (GE 6 at 2) 
 
In early February 2008, Applicant went to another state where there was a 
computer with the same program. Two subject matter experts (SMEs), who were 
associated with Applicant’s team, reviewed the “unclassified data” on the hard drive and 
determined that there was probably classified data on the computer. (Tr. 76-77, 205, 
213; GE 6 at 2-3) Most of the information was unclassified; however, the classified 
information was one table of numbers or parameters, and none of the SMEs were 
aware of how the classified table had migrated from the classified system to the 
unclassified system. (Tr. 77, 88, 90, 213, 232-233) In February 2008, Applicant 
contacted Company D’s FSO and advised her of the possibility of confidential data on 
team computers. The computers were collected to detect any spillage. (Tr. 205-206; GE 
6 at 4) One of the SMEs also contacted his FSO about the possible spillage. (Tr. 206)   
 
Applicant consulted a Navy captain, who advised Applicant to seek the 
assistance of counsel, and in February 2008, he hired a counsel with significant national 
security experience. (Tr. 203; GE 5 at 2; GE 6 at 4; AE M) On March 4, 2008, 
Applicant’s counsel disclosed to the FBI that Applicant deleted the Company D 
proprietary files because Company L had requested the computers. (AE B at 2-3)  
 
After receipt of the first two computers, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service 
(NCIS) and FBI wanted to check a laptop computer and a desk top computer in 
Applicant’s possession for spillage. NCIS requested the two computers in February 
2008. (Tr. 141; AE B) Applicant had saved tax returns and other personal information on 
the desktop computer. The desk top computer was obsolete and lacked sufficient 
computer power to run simulations, and Applicant believed it had no risk of having 
classified data on it. (Tr. 210) Applicant’s attorney wanted to find out whether the two 
computers were owned by Applicant, Company D, or DOD before providing them to the 
FBI or NCIS. (Tr. 141) With the assistance of Company D, Applicant’s attorney 
determined the two computers were probably owned by DOD. On March 4, 2008, 
Applicant’s attorney wrote the FBI volunteering to have Applicant provide the two 
 
6 
                                         
 
computers to the FBI. (Tr. 143-147, 164-165, 226; AE B; AE H) The FBI did not allege 
that there were deletions from the two computers Applicant provided in March 2008; 
however, Applicant said the Company D proprietary information that he did not want to 
release to Company L was on the second set of computers provided to NCIS and the 
FBI. (Tr. 228-230) Applicant deleted the Company D proprietary information. (Tr. 228-
232) Applicant’s attorney disclosed to the FBI that she had retained a copy of the hard 
drive of the desktop computer in her office safe. (Tr. 144; AE B) The FBI never asked 
for the copy of the hard drive. (Tr. 144-145) There is no evidence that the FBI found any 
classified information on the two computers provided on March 4, 2008. (Tr. 172)       
 
Investigators checked some of the computers used in the project; however, they 
did not check all of the other computers used on the project that logically might also 
have spillage. (Tr. 79, 81, 88-89) C assumed that Company L was out to get Applicant 
because of how he was targeted by the investigation. (Tr. 82-83) The FBI did not 
interview C. (Tr. 80) 
 
On August 19, 2010, Applicant and his counsel met with an AUSA and others for 
a proffer session. (Tr. 149) Applicant advised the FBI that Applicant had compact discs 
that he received from Company L with trusted downloads for testing simulations. (Tr. 
156-159, 210, 212) The discs were marked unclassified. (Tr. 210) Applicant also 
disclosed he had the flash drive that contained the C-file that he downloaded on his 
computer in December 2007. (Tr. 222) He had previously deleted the C-file off of the 
flash drive. (Tr. 224) On August 23, 2010, Applicant provided the requested compact 
discs and flash drive to the NCIS. (Tr. 159, 170, 222; AE H)  
 
At the August 19, 2010 proffer, AUSA, an FBI special agent, and two NCIS 
special agents asked Applicant numerous questions about the computers, project, and 
classified data. (Tr. 150; AE C) The forensic examination determined that classified 
materials had been stored on one of the laptop computers. FBI SMEs, who were not 
related to Applicant’s team, reviewed the “classified values” and concluded 11 values 
were not sufficiently scrambled to render them unclassified. (Tr. 213; GE 3; GE 5 at 3; 
AE P) The classification level was deemed to be confidential. (AE L; AE P) Applicant 
believed the FBI SMEs erred in the manner that some of the numbers were “reverse 
engineered” and classified as confidential or secret. (GE 6 at 5) The FBI had been 
relying on erroneous information from SMEs, and the FBI SMEs had mistakenly 
confused some of the unclassified testing numbers with classified data. (Tr. 151, 154, 
211; GE 3) Applicant agreed with the FBI that one table contained classified numbers. 
(Tr. 151-154; GE 5 at 2-3) Applicant conceded his unclassified computer should not 
have been used for classified information because it did not contain the security 
measures required for storage of classified material. (Tr. 155-156)  
 
The AUSA appeared to accept that Applicant was involved in an inadvertent spill 
of classified numbers as opposed to a deliberate attempt to compromise classified 
information. (Tr. 152) On December 16, 2010, an FBI special agent wrote the Defense 
Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) about the investigation of Applicant for 
unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or material in possible 
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1924. (GE 3) The FBI letter advised that no charges would be 
 
7 
                                         
 
filed against Applicant; however, the allegations were referred to DISCO for appropriate 
action. The statute of limitations has now run, and prosecution is barred. (Tr. 153) 
 
From January 2008 to August 2010, the FBI and NCIS did not ask Applicant for 
any evidence. (GE 6 at 7) On March 4, 2008, Applicant’s attorney wrote the FBI and 
offered to cooperate with the FBI investigation. (AE B) Applicant’s attorney indicated 
Applicant was cooperative with the investigation. (Tr. 160)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A Navy captain has known Applicant since the late 1990s and served with him on 
more than one tour at sea. (Tr. 26-27) He has reviewed the SOR and two of Applicant’s 
affidavits related to the SOR. (Tr. 28-29; GE 5; GE 6) He described Applicant as an 
“incredibly gifted” and “incredibly skilled” technician. (Tr. 29, 34) He is “arguably a 
genius” and exceptionally creative. (Tr. 34) On one occasion aboard a warship at sea, 
through Applicant’s diligent and inspired efforts, he was able to make a “great 
breakthrough” with the operation of a vital weapons system. (Tr. 32) Applicant is 
conscientious about the protection of classified information. (Tr. 33) He recommended 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance through the top secret with access to 
sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI) level. (Tr. 37-38)  
 
 A high-level DOD employee with TS/SCI access, who has oversight authority 
over about 9,000 of DOD employees and a $300 million budget, traveled thousands of 
miles at his own expense to support Applicant. (Tr. 41-43, 52-53) He has known 
Applicant since the early 1990s. (Tr. 43) He has reviewed the SOR and two of 
Applicant’s affidavits related to the SOR. (Tr. 44-45; GE 5; GE 6) Applicant occasionally 
discovered design flaws with Company L’s work, and some Company L employees 
resented Applicant. (Tr. 48) Applicant’s comments may have cost Company L some 
award fees that might have otherwise been awarded by the Navy contracting officers. 
(Tr. 48) Applicant is intellectually gifted, talented, professional, and exceptionally diligent 
and dedicated to mission accomplishment. (Tr. 50-51) He recommended reinstatement 
of Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 55)  
 
 A program director on a project has known Applicant since 2003. (AE K) 
Applicant is open, candid, and honest. (AE K) Applicant was committed to the mission 
and U.S. national security interests. (AE K) He is aware of the SOR allegations. (Tr. 60, 
64-66) Company L employees were having difficulty keeping up with Applicant, and 
Applicant did not “endear himself” to Company L when he stated his opinions about 
Company L’s work. (Tr. 66-67) He has complete confidence in Applicant’s ability to 
protect classified information and recommends reinstatement of his access to classified 
information. (Tr. 62, 69; AE K)  
   
 The Navy has employed K for 30 years; he is a GS-15 with extensive expertise in 
simulations and security classification issues; and he has known Applicant 
professionally since the 1990s. (AE L) He performed the NCIS classification review of 
the information found on Applicant’s laptop computers and was briefed on the 
investigation. (AE L; AE P) He concluded Applicant’s violations of security rules were 
 
8 
                                         
 
inadvertent. (AE L) Applicant provided tireless service to the Navy, and he 
recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE L)    
 
C has known Applicant since 1998, and worked with him in 2008. (Tr. 73-79; AE 
I) C has experience in the same technology as Applicant. (Tr. 76) Applicant has 
outstanding integrity, and he recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. (Tr. 83-84)   
 
 M is employed at Company L, and he worked on the 2007-2008 project with 
Applicant. (Tr. 99-100). M recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s security 
clearance. (Tr. 108, 163)  
 
 An attorney with experience as a Defense Investigative Service (DIS) agent and 
substantial experience in national security law represented Applicant beginning in 
February 2008. (Tr. 131; AE M) Applicant waived his attorney-client privilege, which 
permitted the attorney to fully discuss Applicant’s communications to her and 
Applicant’s willingness to cooperate with the investigation. (Tr. 135-136) She 
recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance.     
 
Policies 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
 
9 
                                         
 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
This decision is not based, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. Thus, any decision to deny a security 
clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Two personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those two disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
 
10 
                                         
 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply. Applicant violated rules in December 2007 when he 
discovered that he had downloaded possible classified information onto B’s computer 
and his own computer, and he failed to report this security breach to his FSO (SOR ¶ 
1.a).  
 
Applicant refuted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e. SOR ¶ 1.b. On 
January 28, 2008, Company D asked Applicant to return two computers; however, 
Company D did not indicate it was necessary to return the computers that day. One of 
the computers was at Applicant’s home, and he had other errands to complete that day. 
Applicant provided the computers the next morning. He had a deletion program running 
on one of the computers. No rules were violated.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. The hard drive of one of Applicant’s computers was restricted to 
unclassified information use, and it was found to contain some classified data. Applicant 
was unaware his computer contained classified information. He is not responsible for 
“trusted downloads,” and he inadvertently downloaded classified information from a 
trusted download onto his hard drive. In February 2008, he reported this breach to 
Company D’s FSO. He did not knowingly violate any rules. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. On March 4, 2008, Applicant’s attorney wrote the FBI that Applicant 
was willing to cooperate with the investigation. On August 19, 2010, during the AUSA 
proffer, Applicant mentioned he had compact discs and a flash drive from trusted 
downloads. Applicant did not believe they contained classified information. On August 
23, 2010, Applicant provided the compact discs and flash drive. There is no information 
that they contained classified information.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges Applicant had two computers that he provided to his attorney, 
and his attorney retained them as of December 2010. Applicant had four computers that 
were requested by Company D. Two were requested on January 28, 2008, and he 
turned two of them into Company D on January 29, 2008. In February 2008, the NCIS 
and FBI requested two more computers. Applicant’s attorney wanted to find out whether 
the two computers were owned by Applicant, Company D, or DOD before providing 
them to the FBI or NCIS. On March 4, 2008, Applicant’s attorney wrote the FBI 
volunteering to have Applicant provide the two computers to the FBI. In March 2008, 
Applicant turned in the two computers to the NCIS around March 4, 2008.      
 
 
11 
                                         
 
Further analysis concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required. The 
Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability 
of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) is mitigated by AG ¶ 17(e) because Applicant has fully disclosed his 
rule violations. Law enforcement, security officials, and his witnesses are well aware of 
his security-related conduct, and he is not vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress because of his security-related conduct. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. The only evidence of Applicant’s December 2007 
security breach was Applicant’s self-report; however, his self-report was not timely, as it 
appears it was disclosed at his August 19, 2010 AUSA proffer. However, Applicant’s 
failure to report the December 2007 security breach is not recent; the security breach 
was inadvertent; “it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur;” and it “does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” He admitted that he showed poor judgment in December 2007 when he 
discovered that he had downloaded possible classified information onto B’s computer 
and his own computer, and he failed to report this security breach to his FSO (SOR ¶ 
 
12 
                                         
 
1.a). Security needed to assess the scope of the breach of security or spillage, and 
security was unable to check other computers and determine who was responsible for 
the “trusted download” that caused the security breach.  
 
Applicant understands the importance of informing security of any security 
breach or possible security breach, and I am confident he will timely disclosed required 
information. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated. Even if security concerns are not 
mitigated under Guideline E, they are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra. 
 
Handling Protected Information  
 
  AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern relating to handling protected 
information as follows, “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and 
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard 
such information, and is a serious security concern.” 
 
  AG ¶ 34 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 34(b), 34(c), and 34(g) apply. These three disqualifying conditions do not 
include a requirement that Applicant knew he was downloading classified information 
onto an unclassified system, and they do not require that he be aware that his 
unclassified computer systems contain classified information.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c discussed previously are cross-alleged under SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.c. In December 2007, Applicant discovered that he had downloaded possible 
classified information onto B’s computer and his own computer. The two computers 
were not authorized for storage of classified information.   
 
The hard drive of one of Applicant’s DOD-issued laptop computers was restricted 
to unclassified information use, and a forensic evaluation and SME review found that his 
laptop computer contained some data classified at the confidential level. Applicant was 
unaware this computer contained classified information. He is not responsible for 
 
13 
                                         
 
“trusted downloads,” and he inadvertently downloaded classified information from a 
trusted download onto his hard drive.  
 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
  
AG ¶¶ 35(a) through 35(c) apply. As indicated in the previous section, AG ¶ 35(a) 
is established. The particular simulation program involving inadvertent transfers of 
classified data to unclassified systems was changed to a completely classified system. 
Such erroneous “trusted downloads” will not recur. Applicant understands how 
important it is to avoid future transfers of classified information to unclassified computer 
systems. He has been counseled and understands that when a security violation is 
discovered, it should be timely reported to his FSO. He has a positive attitude towards 
conscientiously complying with security requirements.  
 
  Applicant’s actions since March 2008 show sufficient effort, good judgment, 
trustworthiness, and reliability to warrant mitigation of handling protected information 
security concerns. Even if handling protected information concerns are not mitigated 
under Guideline K, they are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
14 
                                         
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guidelines E and K, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
  
Applicant is a 56-year-old software engineer employed by Company D from 1980 
to 2007. From 2008 to present, he has been employed by another defense contractor. 
His spouse is a security clearance holder; his father was a career Navy officer; his two 
older brothers served in the Navy; and his nephew was a Navy Seal, who served three 
tours in Afghanistan. In 1982, Applicant received a bachelor of science degree in 
mathematics. During Desert Shield, Applicant was deployed for six months to the 
Persian Gulf aboard a U.S. Navy vessel.   
 
A Navy captain, who has known Applicant since the late 1990s; a high-level DOD 
employee, who has oversight authority over about 9,000 of DOD employees and a $300 
million budget and who has known Applicant since the 1990s; a program director on a 
project, who has known Applicant since 2003; two contractors, who worked with 
Applicant on the project at issue; and Applicant’s attorney described Applicant in 
laudatory terms. Applicant is an “incredibly gifted,” exceptionally creative, and 
“incredibly skilled” technician and engineer. He is diligent, intelligent, professional, open, 
candid, honest, and conscientious about the protection of classified information. Most of 
his character witnesses were aware of the SOR allegations, had read Applicant’s 
statements in 2011 and 2013, and recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant’s SOR allegations relate to his handling of confidential information in 
December 2007 and January 2008 and participation in the follow-up investigation in 
2009 and 2010. Company L or Navy employees provided “trusted downloads” to 
Applicant and his team. The trusted downloads were not supposed to contain classified 
data or software; however, there was some classified data mixed in with the unclassified 
data. Applicant and other members of his team unknowingly downloaded the classified 
and unclassified information onto computers allocated to unclassified information. 
Applicant did not compromise classified information as there is no evidence the 
unclassified computers were used by anyone not authorized to review the classified 
information. In December 2007, Applicant discovered possible classified information on 
his unclassified computer and on B’s computer. B and Applicant agreed that they should 
delete it, and they did so. This error was aggravated when Applicant and B failed to 
disclose the discovery of the probable classified information on the flash drive and their 
computers to their FSOs. Applicant did not receive adequate training or supervision 
from B, a GS-13 Navy employee on this occasion. There was no evidence that 
Applicant was told prior to December 2007 of the protocol after discovery of possible 
classified information on an unclassified computer.  
 
After two of Applicant’s assigned DOD-issued computers were requested, he 
deleted Company D proprietary information and personal information before providing 
 
15 
                                         
 
one computer to Company D and one computer to NCIS. These deletions raised the 
possibility that he was intentionally obstructing the investigation because forensic 
examination revealed there were deletions, but could not determine the content of the 
deletions. Applicant provided the only evidence of the content of the deletions. In 
February 2008, after Applicant made the deletions, he hired an experienced national 
security attorney who advised him to cooperate with the investigation. After March 2008, 
Applicant cooperated with the investigation, and his attorney notified the FBI that he 
would assist the investigation. His errors in judgment were made from December 2007 
through February 2008 and are not recent.   
 
Applicant’s hearing statement was credible. He understands what he needs to do 
to maintain his eligibility for access to classified information. He has avoided any hint of 
violation of his employer’s rules or security rules after March 2008. He expressed 
sincere remorse for his infractions of security rules and errors in judgment in December 
2007 and January 2008, and he emphasized his determination to conscientiously 
comply with all security rules and requirements. I am confident he will continue to 
conscientiously exercise his security responsibilities in the future. 
    
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Personal conduct and handling protected information concerns are mitigated, 
and eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
