 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-090021 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision  
__________ 
 
 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Based on a review of Applicant’s e-QIP and the 
ensuing background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 20, 2015, under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
                                                          
1 The wrong ISCR Case Number was listed on the SOR. Department Counsel pointed out the error in 
the FORM and made a handwritten correction to the SOR. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On February 19, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 12, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
marked as Items 1 through 4. On June 24, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM and was given 30 days from its receipt to submit objections and supply 
additional information. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on December 28, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling $14,745 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.f). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each debt. Her admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old software engineer who has been working for a defense 
contractor since September 2011. She graduated from high school in 2003 and earned 
a bachelor’s degree in 2011. She has never been married and has no children. This is 
apparently the first time that she has sought to obtain a security clearance.3 
 
 The delinquent debts consist of four student loans, a cell phone account, and a 
utility bill. A credit report dated October 7, 2014, reflected that all of the delinquent debts 
had dates of last activity in 2009.4  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she paid all of her bills on time 
before 2008. In 2007, her father passed away. At that time, she began assisting her 
sisters financially. She obtained cell phones for her sisters and signed a car loan for one 
of them. One sister defaulted on the car loan and cell telephone account. The car was 
repossessed. She also had a roommate who vacated the premises and left her with the 
bills. Her e-QIP listed periods of unemployment from June 2008 to January 2010 and 
from November 2010 to September 2011.5 
 
 Applicant also stated that, since obtaining her current job, she has been paying 
the bills in a slow but consistent manner. She indicated that her tax refund of $2,500 
went toward payment of the student loans and that she has been paying at least $600 a 
month toward those loans. She also stated she paid $750 toward the other debts and 
indicated that she entered into a repayment plan with the cell phone company. She 
provided no documents confirming any of the payments that she mentioned.6  
                                                          
2 Items 1, 2. 
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Item 4.   
 
5 Items 3, 4.   
 
6 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence that she received financial counseling. She did 
not provide a monthly budget. In her Answer to the SOR, she claimed she could pay 
$1,800 a month toward the delinquent debt, but provided no documentary evidence 
supporting that claim.7 
  
 In the FORM, Department Counsel pointed out that without documentary proof to 
corroborate Applicant’s assertions and demonstrate what progress she had made in 
repaying the debts, it is impossible to determine whether she has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. As noted above, Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
7 Item 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence established two disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 19:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 In 2007, Applicant’s father passed away. She assisted her sisters financially. 
One of her sisters defaulted on a car loan that Applicant signed for her and on another 
account she opened for her. Applicant also experienced periods of unemployment and 
had a roommate default on a lease. These were circumstances beyond her control. 
However, Applicant failed to present any evidence corroborating that she has made 
payments or payment plans to resolve the delinquent debts. In the absence of such 
documentation, insufficient evidence has been presented to conclude that Applicant has 
acted responsibly under the circumstances or that her financial problems are under 
control and are being resolved. No evidence was presented that she received financial 
counseling. Her financial problems continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 
and 20(d) do not apply 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.8 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
                                                          
8 The adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue. Applicant failed to meet her 
burden of persuasion. Her financial problems leave me with doubts as to her current 
eligibility to access classified information. Following the Egan decision and the “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard, doubts about granting Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance must be resolved in favor of national security.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
