 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09243 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on three 
collection accounts and two charged-off accounts, which total more than $19,000. There 
is no showing of payments having been made on the debts. Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on May 11, 2015, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On June 
12, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without 
a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 27, 
2015. The FORM contained six attachments (Items). On August 31, 2015, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. 
As of November 6, 2015, no response or documents had been received. On December 
1, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted two student loans had been 
placed for collection totaling more than $19,000. He also admitted one collection 
account and two charged-off accounts, which totaled approximately $500. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old manager who has worked for a defense contractor 
since November 2005 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 2) From October 
2000 through October 2005, he honorably served in the U.S. Marine Corps. (Item 3) 
From July 2002 until July 2003, he served in Japan and from February 2004 through 
July 2004, he served in Iraq. (Item 6) 
 
In 2004, Applicant obtained student loans for classes at a technical school. In his 
July 2012 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), he acknowledge the student loan debts had 
been turned over to a collection agency. (Item 6) He stated he planned to pay off the 
$22,000 delinquent debts in August 2012 or September 2012. (Item 6) In his June 2012 
SOR answer, he stated he was preparing to challenge the amount owed. (Item 2) The 
school had closed and he did not believe the owed the amount claimed. (Item 2)  
 
In Applicants July 2012 PSI, the $260 collection debt (SOR 1.a), the $119 
charged-off debt (SOR 1.b), and the $143 charged-off debt (SOR 1.c) were discussed. 
(Item 6) At that time, he indicated he planned to satisfy the $260 and $143 debts. (Item 
6) He also recognized the $119 car loan debt which he asserted his former spouse paid. 
(Item 6) In his SOR answer, he asserted the $260 debt and the $119 debt had been 
paid. No documents were received establishing payment of these debts. 
 
Applicant was put on notice in the FORM that he could submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanations. The 
FORM also indicated that he had provided no supporting documentation as to his 
assertions of payment. He provided no information concerning financial counseling, 
payment of his delinquent debts, or documents showing his finances were under 
control. He provided no indication as to his annual income or expenses.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
4 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has two student loan collection debts totaling more than $19,000. He 
also has three other delinquent debts totaling approximately $500. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
5 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer for 10 years. In July 2012, he was made aware of 
the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt when his delinquent obligations 
were discussed during an interview. At that time, he acknowledged his debt and said he 
was planning on paying his delinquent student loans in August or September 2012. 
There is no evidence he did so. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He 
has provided no information as to his annual income, annual expenses, or 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control. He has not shown he has a 
plan to bring his delinquent obligations under control. Without any payments having 
been established, he has failed to show he has made a good-faith effort to satisfy his 
debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. In July 
2012, he was notified of the Government’s concern over his delinquent obligations. 
Given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed 
to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG & 20(b) does 
not apply. Applicant provided no information concerning factors beyond his control.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is no clear showing that his 
financial obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the 
delinquent accounts. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply 
because none of the delinquent obligations have been denied.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served five 
years in the U.S. Marine Corps, serving in Japan and Iraq. However, he has failed to 
document any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the 
Government’s concern about his delinquent debts since his July 2012 PSI and his July 
2015 SOR. No delinquent debts have been paid and there is no documentation 
Applicant has recently contacted his creditors. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on the scant explanation in response to the SOR, he 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant   
   
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
