1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-08823
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On May 2, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued as of September
1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 14, 2015. Although he did not explicitly
admit or deny the allegations, he provided information that refuted subparagraphs 1.a
and 1.d, and he elaborated on the information alleged in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c. I
2
construe these responses as a denial of subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d, and an admission
of subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c. I received the case on September 17, 2015. On
September 23, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
notice of hearing for October 8, 2015. I held the hearing as scheduled. During the
hearing, I received three Government exhibits (Government Exhibits (GE) I - GE 3), and
14 Applicant exhibits. (Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - AE N) I took administrative notice, at
Department Counsel’s request, of information about Iraq set forth in six documents
generated by various U.S. government agencies. (Hearing Exhibits (HE) I-VI) DOHA
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 16, 2015. 
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open to allow Applicant to submit
additional evidence. Within the time allotted, he submitted 45 exhibits (AE O - AE GGG)
Department Counsel had no objection to any of the exhibits except AE S. I sustained the
objection, and I admitted the remainder of the post-hearing exhibits as AE O - AE R, and
AE T through AE GGG.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a married man with children. He was born and raised in Iraq. After
graduating from high school, he attended Iraq’s army military college, graduating with the
rank of second lieutenant. After the U.S. - led coalition removed Saddam Hussein from
power and disbanded the Iraqi Army in 2003, Applicant joined the coalition’s efforts at
stabilizing the country and creating a civil society. Applicant agreed to help the United
States because he agreed with the values it was promoting. (Tr. 83) 
In 2004, there was a major uprising led by Saddam Hussein loyalists in the Iraqi
Army. (AE E) Approximately 85 percent of the Iraqi Army deserted. However, Applicant,
“stood stalwart” and was subsequently promoted. (AE E) Six months later he was
promoted again.
Applicant’s service was extraordinary. (AE Q, Attachment 8) He simultaneously
“stamped out corruption in his unit” while assisting U.S. forces with executing counter-
insurgent operations. (AE R; AE KK) He “led from the front, and led by example every
day,” earning “the confidence of colonels and . . . the ear of generals.” (AE KK) U.S.
officers “completely put their lives in his hands, trusting him enough to ride alone through
the streets . . .” (AE JJ) His unit held fast [after] multiple attacks during a particularly
volatile period in 2004. (AE KK) He often led his soldiers on anti-insurgent missions
without seeking help from the U.S. Army. (AE LL) His unit helped guard polling stations
during the first Iraqi elections. (AE GGG)
Applicant’s life and the lives of his family members were in constant danger. Al-
Queda placed a bounty on his life. (Tr. 41) He survived multiple assassination attempts.
(GE 3 at 4) Between 2004 and 2006, terrorists during different episodes attacked his
home, his family, and kidnapped immediate family members. According to a U.S. Army
veteran and Purple Heart Recipient who served two tours of duty in Iraq, “the personal
3
threat to [Applicant’s] life and safety never diminished his commitment to the common
American and Iraqi goal of building a safer, more stable Iraq.” (AE Q)
Applicant’s father was seriously injured by a car bomb explosion. (Tr. 42) Later,
terrorists killed an in-law. (Tr. 43) Shortly after that, terrorists kidnapped a relative, a
child. (Tr. 43) They called Applicant and told him that they would kill this child if Applicant
did not leave the Iraqi Army. Applicant responded, “no, I will stay and help the U.S. Army
. . .” The terrorists then killed the child. (Tr. 43) 
Terrorists killed Applicant’s father and brutally assaulted his mother. (Tr. 42) As a
result, the U.S. Government granted Applicant asylum, and moved him and his family to
the United States. (Tr. 17)
Applicant was unable to find work for the first two years that he lived in the United
States. He supported his family through a combination of savings and support from the
U.S. military. (GE 2 at 2) In 2008, he obtained a job with a defense contractor as a
cultural advisor, training assistant, and role player. (AE H) From 2012 to 2014, he
worked in this capacity as a self-employed consultant. (AE A)
Applicant was highly respected on the job. According to a colonel who worked
with Applicant in 2009, “he was the perfect mentor that provided timely and sincere
advice.” (AE P) According to another colonel, Applicant “consistently receive[d] laudatory
after-action review comments by numerous deploying advisors.” (AE HH) Since 2014,
Applicant has worked for a company that screens translators for the U.S. Army. (Tr. 34)  
Applicant and his immediate family members became naturalized U.S. citizens.
(GE 2 at 2; Answer at 2-3; Tr. 67) He is estranged from the remainder of his family, as
they blame him for the tragedies that they suffered. (Tr. 53, 55) With the exception of
one visit to his siblings living in Malaysia, Applicant had no contact with any of his
relatives between 2007 and 2010. (Tr. 52) His mother, a homemaker, remains at the
family’s ancestral home in Iraq. Applicant now speaks with her approximately once a
month. On two occasions, he has sent her money, totalling $1,000 (Tr. 52) 
Applicant has eight siblings. Two siblings remain in Iraq. One of them lives with
Applicant’s mother. Applicant talks with him once per year. (Tr. 43) He does not know
what this sibling does for a living. (GE 2 at 2) Since  immigrating to the United States in
2006, Applicant has had no contact with his other sibling living in Iraq. (Tr. 54) He does
not know what this sibling does for a living. Applicant has another sibling who is an Iraqi
citizen that lives in Turkey. This sibling works for an international organization. (Tr. 71)
Applicant has not talked with him since 2006. (Tr. 72)
The remainder of Applicant’s siblings are British citizens. Three live in the United
Kingdom, and the remaining two siblings live in Malaysia. (Tr. 56) Applicant’s last contact
with his siblings in Malaysia occurred in 2008, as referenced earlier in the Decision.
Applicant last spoke with his relatives living in the United Kingdom when he visited there
in 2014. (Tr. 56)
4
Applicant has an Iraqi friend who lives in the United States and drives a taxi for a
living, as referenced in SOR subparagraph 1.d. He is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr.
59)
Since the 2011 U.S. military withdrawal from Iraq, sectarian and ethnic divisions
have widened, fueling a major challenge to Iraq’s stability. (HE III at 1) U.S. citizens in
Iraq remain at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. (HE II at 1) Numerous
insurgent groups remain active and violence persists in many areas of the country. (HE I
at 4)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest” (AG
¶ 6). Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of
the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including,
but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
5
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism” (Id.).
Applicant’s spouse is no longer an Iraqi citizen. Similarly, his friend, alleged in
subparagraph 1.d to be an Iraqi citizen living in the United States, is now a naturalized
U.S. citizen. I resolve SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d in Applicant’s favor.
The Government presented no evidence about Malaysia’s geo-political profile vis
a vis the United States, whether Malaysia is either associated with a risk of terrorism or
whether Malaysia is known to conduct espionage. Although the Government’s burden is
minimal, it is a burden nonetheless. Applicant’s siblings who are United Kingdom citizens
living in Malaysia do not generate a security risk.  
Iraq remains a highly volatile, unstable country where terrorists, separatists, and
insurgents continue to battle for control. This situation has worsened since the United
States withdrew its military forces in 2011. Iraq remains highly unsafe for U.S. citizens to
travel there. This lingering instability and danger are significant enough to place
Applicant at a heightened risk of coercion or inducement through his mother and two
siblings who remain Iraqi citizens and residents. AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” applies.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.
Applicant seldom talks to his siblings. Nevertheless, his situation before
immigrating to the United States, together with the constant attacks on his family when
he lived in Iraq render AG ¶ 8 (c) inapplicable.
Applicant has been living in the United States for nearly a decade. He is
profoundly committed to promoting U.S. values. He demonstrated this daily while serving
in the Iraqi Army under extraordinarily dangerous conditions, steadfastly battling
terrorists daily and helping to stamp out corruption in the unit where he served, despite
multiple assassination attempts and the murder of several relatives. Under these
circumstances, AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered the whole-person concept factors when I evaluated the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions, above. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence
security concern. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
