 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11440 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 24, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 16, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 30, 2015. The evidence included in the FORM 
 
2 
 
 
is identified as Items 3-5 (Items 1-2 are pleadings). The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
who received it on October 9, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He chose not to submit any 
further information. Items 3-5 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me 
on November 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He denied the 
remaining allegations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is married and has two children from former 
relationships. He has worked for a federal contractor since January 2012. He has an 
associate’s degree. He has never served in the military.1  
  
 The SOR lists 10 delinquent debts totaling approximately $53,340 and 
Applicant’s failure to file federal and state income tax returns for years 2009 through 
2012. The largest delinquent debts are for a student loan account ($26,029) and a child-
support collection account ($24,484). The debts are supported by a credit report from 
July 2012, Applicant’s security clearance application, his admissions to a defense 
investigator, and his admissions to the SOR.2 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (student loan collection debt $26,029): 
 
 The last action on this debt was in April 2012. Applicant claimed he originally 
made $100 monthly payments on this account from 2005 to 2008 until he could no 
longer afford to make these payments. No documentation supporting these payments 
was offered. In his answer, he claimed that from 2014 to 2015 he made payments 
totaling $2,180 towards this debt. No documentation supporting these payments was 
offered. This debt is unresolved.3 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.c (credit card collection debts $446; $1,105): 
 
 As for ¶ 1.b, Applicant acknowledged this debt and that he had not made any 
payments. The date of last action for this debt was February 2007. As for ¶ 1.c, 
Applicant claims he made some payments on this debt, but stopped because of lack of 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2-5. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
funds. No documentation was provided to support these payments. The date of last 
action on this debt was April 2012. This debt is unresolved.4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d - 1.f (three medical collection accounts $594; $164; $136): 
 
 Applicant denied all these debts, but they remain on his credit report. He 
presented no proof of payment, evidence of payment plans, or evidence supporting 
disputes of the debts. These debts are unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g - 1.i (three collection accounts $42; $170; $170): 
 
 Applicant denied all these debts in his answer, but admitted them in his interview 
with a defense investigator in July 2012. He further claimed payment, but provided no 
supporting documentation. These debts are unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j (child support collection debt $24,484): 
 
 Applicant acknowledged owing back child support for his two children from 
previous marriages in his security clearance interview. In his answer to the SOR, he 
disputed the amount owed, but offered no supporting documentation. This debt is 
unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k - 1.l (failure to file federal income tax returns (2009-2011) and state tax 
returns (2009-2012): 
 
 Applicant explained he was unable to file his federal and state tax returns 
because of the divorce he was going through at the time. He either lost or misplaced the 
necessary documentation to file his returns. In his answer to the SOR, he claimed he 
filed his federal and state tax returns for years 2009-2011 and intended to file his 2012 
state tax return by July 2015. He failed to present documentation supporting the filing of 
his tax returns. His tax return filings are unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling. He stated that his 
financial difficulties resulted from his divorces and limited employment opportunities.9 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
5 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
6 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
7 Items 2, 4-5. 
 
8 Items 2-3, 5. 
 
9 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved and unfiled 
federal and state income tax returns. I find all the above disqualifying conditions are 
raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented evidence that the debts were due to circumstances beyond 
his control, namely his divorces and limited employment opportunities. He failed to 
present evidence showing he acted responsibly under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) partially applies. He did not provide documentation showing that any debts were 
paid, that he established any payment plans, or that he filed his federal and state tax 
returns. There is no evidence of credit counseling or evidence supporting disputes of 
any of the debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not shown a track 
record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
