 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 12-10934  
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 9, 2012, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 23, 2015. Applicant requested 
her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 29, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, was 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
provided to the Applicant on August 26, 2015. She was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on September 3, 2015.  
 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on October 3, 2015.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on June 28, 2012. Applicant did not adopt it as her 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. She objected to its use. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence 
of an authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
 The Department Counsel amended the SOR to correct a typographical error by 
changing the case heading from No. 12-08151 to 12-10934. (FORM, page 2) 
 
I received the case assignment on October 19, 2015. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $71,223. Applicant asserts two 
debts are paid and three debts are being worked on toward resolution. Therefore, 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.e and admitted the three 
other allegations (Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d.) (Items 1, 2; Answer; Response)  
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She is married and has three children. She has a 
bachelor’s degree. Applicant served in the U.S. Army and retired as an E-8 in 2005 after 
23 years of service. She worked for a defense contractor for the past 10 years. (Items 2, 
3) 
 
 Applicant’s Response included a September 28, 2015 credit report. It lists her 
debts and the current status as of that date. Her total delinquent payments are $71,223 
and the mortgage total is $377,774 on the three houses she owns in two states. (SOR; 
Response) 
 
 Applicant owes a mortgage lender $22,466 in past-due payments on a loan 
balance of $151,188 on House 1 (Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant owned this house when 
stationed at one military installation. Applicant rented House 1 to tenants after her 
transfer to another base for about one year, but then she could not find new tenants 
after the first lessees departed. She tried to rent House 1 for over a year. She was trying 
to arrange a short sale of House 1 but it has not been completed by the date of the 
SOR. Then, in her Response she submitted a letter from the bank lender dated April 3, 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
2015, stating her short sale was approved. Applicant planned a short sale on June 2, 
2015. Applicant’s Response credit report of September 2015 lists this debt as number 
31 and shows it was legally paid for less than the full amount. The account numbers in 
the SOR and on the September 2015 credit report are the same. The debt delinquency 
dates from 2013. Her Response includes the settlement document for the sale of House 
1 in August 2015. Applicant resolved the mortgage debt. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; 
Response) 
 
 Applicant purchased another house (House 2) when transferred to another base 
in the same state and could not sell House 1. Meanwhile, the Department’s FORM 
alleges she spent money on several credit cards to refurbish House 2 including the 
installation of a pool. In her September 2015 Response, Applicant objected to the 
Department Counsel’s statement that she incurred credit card debt to refurbish House 
2. She stated she refinanced the House 2 to make those changes including the 
installation of a pool. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; Response) 
 
  Applicant owed a bank on a mortgage account that is past due more than 120 
days in the amount of $25,550 with a loan balance of $226,586 (Subparagraph 1.b).  
This debt is owed on House 3 which Applicant purchased in another state different from 
the location of the first two houses. She was stationed there before moving to her last 
two military assignments. Her Answer states this house was sold on March 30, 2015. 
She contends she does not owe the bank any money. This debt dates from 2013. She 
resolved this debt. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; Response letter of September 19, 2015, 
referring to No. 19 on Excel spreadsheet attached) 
 
 Applicant owes a telephone company $1,388 (Subparagraph 1.c). Applicant’s 
Answer admitted the debt and stated she arranged to pay this debt in five installment 
payments of $212.93 payable biweekly starting June 19, 2015, and completed on 
August 14, 2015. This debt dates from 2014. Her Response’s credit report lists this debt 
as Number 28 and that it was legally paid for less than the balance owed. Applicant 
included a document from the collector showing the debt was settled in full. This debt is 
resolved. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant owes a lending company $15,764 (Subparagraph 1.d). Her Answer 
states this personal loan was needed to provide money to support her family when her 
houses were not selling. She states the last two payments of $404.62 were made on 
April 13 and 27, 2015. This debt originally became due in 2014. Her Response’s credit 
report lists this debt as Number 24 on the list and shows it was “charged off,” and not 
paid in any way. Her Response shows on her spreadsheet that she needs to make 
arrangements to pay the debt. Her Response statement admits this debt is the only one 
unpaid. This debt is not resolved. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant owed a credit card company $6,055 (Subparagraph 1.e). Applicant’s 
Answer states she settled the debt for $4,335.54. Her Response included a document 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
showing the debt was paid in July 2013. This debt is resolved. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer; 
Response)  
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. Her Response did include two documents from a debt 
resolution company but no detailed information about what she paid it or what action 
they took to resolve her debts.  She did not offer any evidence concerning her family 
income so her ability to repay debts could be evaluated. She provided no evidence 
concerning the quality of her job performance. She submitted no character references 
or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I 
was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she 
elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2013 to the present, Applicant accumulated five delinquent debts, totaling 
$71,223. The mortgages she owed that were unpaid or unresolved when the SOR was 
issued total $377,774.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only two mitigating conditions have partial 
applicability. 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (c) would apply if there were clear indications her financial delinquencies 
are being resolved or are under control. Applicant has paid four of the five delinquent 
debts. She has one $15,764 debt to resolve. This mitigating condition applies to four of 
the five debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies to the same four debts (Subparagraphs 1 a. to 1.c, and 1.e.) 
Only the debt in Subparagraph 1.d is unresolved. This mitigating condition applies 
partially.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an  
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She took action to resolve her delinquent debts, except one debt for 
$15,448. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, she 
exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any 
of her delinquent debts during the past two years until the SOR was sent to her. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c, 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
