 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10122 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 10, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 20, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
21, 2015, scheduling the hearing for September 16, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 24, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since at least 1996. He served in the U.S. military reserve from 
1976 until he was honorably discharged in 1983. He seeks to retain his security 
clearance, which he has held since the 1970s. He has a bachelor’s degree that was 
awarded in 1997. He has never married, and he has no children.1 
 
 Applicant did not file federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2009 when 
they were due. He moved to a state that did not have state income taxes in 2009. He 
did not file federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 through 2013 when they were 
due.2   
 
 Applicant reported on his January 2012 Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) that he did not file his tax returns for tax years 2009 and 2010. He 
wrote that he “[j]ust got too busy and kept putting it off.” He noted that he was 
“[c]urrently working on [his] 2009 taxes and then can do 2010 taxes.”3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2012. He 
stated that he had not filed his tax returns because he was too busy, lazy, and 
disorganized. He stated that he was gathering the documents necessary to file the tax 
returns and that the returns would be filed within the next two weeks.4 
 
 Applicant filed his 2009 state income tax return and his federal income tax 
returns for 2009 through 2014 in about July 2015, after he received the SOR. His state 
tax return for 2009 indicates that he was due a refund. His 2009 federal tax return 
indicates that he was due a $7,285 refund. He requested that $6,000 of that refund be 
applied to his 2010 estimated tax. However, there is a three-year statute of limitations 
that “prevents the issuance of a refund check and the application of any credits, 
including overpayments of estimated or withholding taxes, to other tax years that are 
underpaid.”5 The 2010 federal tax return showed that Applicant was due a refund of 
$4,640. However, the return requested that $5,000 be applied from the 2009 return. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-21; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 15; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. The SOR only alleged that Applicant did not file income 
tax returns in 2009 and 2011. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be used in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole-
person analysis. 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
5 See https://www.irs.gov/taxtopics/tc153.html.  
 
3 
 
That $5,000 was barred by the statute of limitations, so Applicant actually owed for 
2010. He paid $654 in September 2015 to satisfy the remaining taxes, penalties, and 
interest for 2010.6 
 
 Applicant’s 2011 federal income tax return showed that he owed $9, which does 
not include penalties and interest. He paid the IRS $9. The 2012 tax return indicated 
that Applicant owed $326, which he paid. He paid an additional $211 in August 2015 to 
satisfy the penalties and interest. Applicant paid the IRS $183 in July 2015 and $161 in 
August 2015 to satisfy his 2013 federal taxes, penalties, and interest. He paid the IRS 
$1,151 in July 2015 and $181 in August 2015 to satisfy his 2014 federal taxes, 
penalties, and interest.7  
 
 Other than his tax issues, Applicant’s finances are in good shape. He has no 
delinquent debts, and he has about $600,000 in savings, investments, and retirement 
accounts. He stated that he did not file his tax returns due to his “own stupidity.” He also 
admitted that he was disorganized. He realized once he completed the returns that they 
were not that difficult to prepare. He assured that he will file his tax returns on time in 
the future.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 15-16; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A-K. 
 
7 AE A-G. 
 
8 Tr. at 15-24; GE 1, 2; AE L. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant did not file federal and state income tax returns when they were due. 
AG ¶ 19(g) is applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant did not file his tax returns because he was too busy, lazy, and 
disorganized. He was not attempting to avoid paying his taxes; he lost more in forfeited 
refunds than he had to pay. However, he knew when he submitted the SF 86 in January 
2012 that his unfiled returns were a problem. He wrote that he was “[c]urrently working 
on [his] 2009 taxes and then can do 2010 taxes.” During his March 2012 interview he 
stated that the returns would be filed within the next two weeks. Despite those 
assertions, Applicant did not file any returns for tax years 2009 through 2014 until after 
he received the SOR. 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are recent. They continue to cast doubt on his 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to comply with laws and regulations. AG 
¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable because the returns have 
been filed. Nonetheless, financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence 
of some mitigation.9   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, reliability, and a 
sense of his or her legal obligations. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal 
obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information. Indeed, the Board has 
previously noted that a person who has a history of not fulfilling their legal obligation to 
file income tax returns may be said not to have demonstrated the high degree of 
judgment and reliability required for access to classified information. (internal citation 
omitted) 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has a long and stable work history, and his finances are otherwise in 
excellent condition. However, he failed to comply with a fundamental legal requirement.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant.10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant failed to file his 2009 and 2011 state tax returns. He was not required 
to file a 2011 state tax return. The part of the allegation related to the 2011 state tax return is concluded 
for Applicant. 
 
