 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 12-12065 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 24, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On May 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (e-QIP, dated July 24, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF 
was unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. On July 13, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on August 21, 
2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In 
addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the 
Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on September 1, 2015. 
A response was due by October 1, 2015. Applicant did not submit any response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 12, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., and 1.f. through 1.l.), and 
one of the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.). The remaining 
allegations were either denied (¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e.) or seemingly not answered (¶ 2.b.). 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an 
equipment specialist with his current employer since July 2011. He was a driver for one 
particular company from October 1993 until he was laid off in July 2010. After a brief 
period of unemployment, Appellant obtained temporary employment, with less hours 
and reduced salary, in a warehouse with a company from August 2010 until December 
2010, and then with another company from February 2011 through June 2011.2 He is a 
1972 high school graduate.3 Applicant enlisted in a component of the U.S. Air Force in 
November 1972, and he was honorably discharged in July 1975.4 He held a security 
clearance while he was in the Air Force.5 He was married to his first wife in 1988 and 
                                                          
2
 Item 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 30, 2012), at 3; Item 3, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
3
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
4
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 10-11; Item 8, supra note 2, at 5. Some confusion exists regarding the Air Force 
component, for in his e-QIP, Applicant indicated he was in the Inactive Reserve of the U.S. Air Force, but during his 
interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), he stated he was on active duty. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 20-21. 
 
3 
                                      
 
divorced in 1995. He married his second wife in 2001. He was widowed when she 
passed away in November 2011.6 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties, but in reviewing 
his credit reports from August 2012,7 December 2014,8 and August 2015,9 as well as his 
comments to the OPM investigator, it appears that several delinquent accounts existed 
as far back as 2007, with additional ones entering that status over the ensuing years. 
Applicant had delinquent mortgage loans, home equity loans, automobile loans, multiple 
cellular telephone accounts, and satellite television accounts. Although he does not 
specifically attribute any one particular cause to his financial problems, he did mention 
the lay-off, temporary employment, and the death of his second wife. As to some 
specific accounts, he offered some brief explanations. 
 
The SOR identified 12 purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $108,105, which had been placed for collection, charged off, or involved 
a repossession. Although Applicant offered comments regarding each of the accounts, 
he failed to submit any documentation to support his contentions pertaining to his 
actions or activities to resolve them. Those debts and their respective current status, 
according to the above-cited credit reports, Applicant’s comments to the OPM 
investigator, and his Answer to the SOR, are described as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. – This is a conventional home mortgage account with a high credit of 
$91,597, an over 120 days past-due balance of $30,512, and a remaining balance of 
$100,259. It was placed for collection and sold or transferred to another company in 
October 2014.10 During his OPM interview, Applicant acknowledged that the account 
became five months past due, but contended that he was enrolled in an unspecified 
government program to provide loan assistance to lower his monthly payments.11 His 
December 2014 credit report reflected that the past-due balance had increased to 
$57,866.12 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended that the house had been 
sold.13 The account does not appear in his August 2015 credit report. Nevertheless, 
there is no documentary evidence to support a finding that the account has been 
resolved. 
                                                          
6
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 6; Item 3, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
7
 Item 7 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 3, 2012). 
 
8
 Item 6 (Equifax Credit Report, dated December 5, 2014). 
 
9
 Item 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 19, 2015). 
 
10
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 6. 
 
11
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
12
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
13
 Item 2 (Answer to the SOR, dated July 13, 2015), at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.k. – This is an automobile loan account with a high credit 
reflected as both $10,616 and $19,696 and past-due balance of $11,483 that was 
placed for collection, and charged off.14 Applicant contended the vehicle needed to be 
repaired and he had lost his job so he returned it,15 and his 2012 credit report lists it as 
a repossession.16 The account was obtained by another collection agent who listed the 
reacquisition as an involuntary repossession and increased the past-due and unpaid 
balance amounts to $11,972.17 The account is listed two times in the SOR, but both 
items refer to the same account. There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to 
resolve the account.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c. – This is an automobile loan account with a high credit of $20,011, a 
past-due balance of $782, and a remaining balance of $19,503, that was placed for 
collection, and $10,703 was charged off.18 Applicant contended the vehicle was in his 
brother-in-law’s name and that it was “turned in” when he got a new car.19 He did not 
explain what the term “turned in” means or if the vehicle was traded or simply 
relinquished. There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to resolve the account.  
  
SOR ¶ 1.d. – This is a cellular telephone account with an unpaid balance of $891 
that became delinquent in February 2013 and was subsequently placed for collection in 
December 2014.20 Applicant noted that although he had the account for approximately a 
decade, the monthly charges kept increasing, and he obtained a better deal with 
another company.21 There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to resolve the 
account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e. – This is a cellular telephone account with a past-due and unpaid 
balance of $450 that became delinquent in June 2012 and was subsequently placed for 
collection, charged off, and transferred or sold to another debt collection company.22 
Applicant explained that he opened the account to be used by the son of his stepson. 
The bill was too much to pay, so he transferred to another plan.23 He claimed he was 
                                                          
14
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 8; Item 8, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
15
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 1-2. 
 
16
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 8. 
 
17
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 2; Item 5, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 8; Item 8, supra note 2, at 4; Item 5, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
19
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 1. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
21
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
22
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 9; Item 6, supra note 8, at 2. 
  
23
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
unaware of any remaining balance.24 There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to 
resolve the account after learning that there was a past-due balance. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f. – This is a satellite television account with an unpaid balance of $299 
that became delinquent in December 2012 and was subsequently placed for collection 
in April 2014.25 Applicant explained that he switched providers when he obtained a 
better deal with another company.26 There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to 
resolve the account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g. – This is an electric utility account, incorrectly alleged in the SOR as 
a satellite television account, with a high credit of $477 and a past-due balance of $126, 
that became delinquent in August 2013. It was subsequently placed for collection and 
charged off in the amount of $477.27 In addition to the charged-off amount, the account 
is still $35 past due.28 Applicant contended he paid the account,29 but he failed to submit 
any documentation to support his contention. Under the circumstances, I am unable to 
conclude that Applicant has resolved the account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h. – This is an account with a furniture rental company with a high credit 
of $194 and a past-due and remaining balance of $109. It became delinquent in April 
2013 and was subsequently placed for collection and charged off in the amount of 
$194.30 Applicant contended he paid the account,31 but he failed to submit any 
documentation to support his contention. Under the circumstances, I am unable to 
conclude that Applicant has resolved the account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i. – This is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $70 that 
became delinquent in February 2012 and was placed for collection in July 2012.32 There 
is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to resolve the account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j. – This is a home equity line of credit with a high credit of $15,000 and 
a past-due and remaining balance of $14,851 that was placed for collection and 
charged off in 2010.33 Applicant contended that the account was taken over by same 
                                                          
24
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
25
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
26
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
27
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 2; Item 5, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
28
 Item 5, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
29
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
30
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 2; Item 5, supra note 9, at 4. 
 
31
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
32
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 2; Item 5, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
33
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 7; Item 8, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
bank that initially held the first mortgage, identified in SOR ¶ 1.a.,34 but he failed to 
submit any documentation to support his contention. Under the circumstances, I am 
unable to conclude that Applicant has resolved the account. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l. – This is an automobile insurance account with a remaining balance 
of $279 that was placed for collection in June 2012.35 Applicant claimed he was 
unaware of any delinquency, and he stated he would make a payment if he actually 
owes the debt.36 In his Answer to the SOR, he contended he had paid it,37 but he failed 
to submit any documentation to support his contention. Under the circumstances, I am 
unable to conclude that Applicant has resolved the account. 
 
While Applicant had stated during his OPM interview, that he was “capable of 
meeting his current financial obligations,” he failed to furnish a personal financial 
statement setting forth his net monthly income; his monthly household expenses; and 
his monthly debt payments. In the absence of such information, I am unable to 
determine if he has any monthly remainder available for savings or spending. Thus, it is 
nearly impossible to determine if Applicant’s finances are under control or if he is still 
experiencing financial difficulties. There is no evidence that Applicant ever sought the 
services of a financial advisor, or that Applicant ever received financial counseling. As of 
the date of his OPM interview, he had not done either.38 There is a paucity of evidence 
to indicate that his financial problems are now under control. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a. – On July 24, 2012, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he 
responded to questions pertaining to his financial record. Several of those questions in 
Section 26 – Financial Record – asked if, in the past seven years, he had any 
possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed; if he had defaulted on 
any type of loan; if he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; if he had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; 
or if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to 
those questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to 
the best of his knowledge and belief,39 but the responses to those questions were, in 
fact, incorrect for at that time Applicant had several accounts that fell within the stated 
parameters. During his OPM interview, Applicant stated that his omissions were a 
                                                          
34
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
35
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 11. 
 
36
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
37
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
38
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
39
 e-QIP, supra note 1, at 21-22, 25. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
mistake.40 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation, without 
comment.41 
  
 SOR ¶ 2.b. – On the same day, Applicant also responded to questions pertaining 
to his police record. Several of those questions in Section 22 – Police Record – asked if 
he had “EVER” been charged with any felony offenses; or been charged with an offense 
involving alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered “no” to those questions. He certified that 
the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and 
belief,42 but the responses to those questions were, in fact, false for, in June 1991, at 
the age of 35, Applicant was charged with: (1) purchasing over 20 grams of marijuana, 
a felony; (2) possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor; and (3) possession of marijuana 
with intent to distribute, a felony. No action was taken with respect to counts (1) and (2), 
but he was prosecuted for count (3). Adjudication was withheld, and Applicant was 
sentenced to probation for four years.43 He told the OPM investigator that “he did not 
realize this information was to be included on the [e-QIP].”44 In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant failed to admit or deny the allegation, but simply commented: “I went to a 
hearing for this two or three years ago.”45 
 
 During his OPM interview, Applicant claimed he was unable to “complete” 
unspecified information on his e-QIP because he lacked experience with computers.46 A 
cursory review of the e-QIP reveals various errors or omissions in his responses in a 
number of areas such as employment record, military history, former spouse summary, 
relatives, police record, investigations and clearance record, and financial record. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”47 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
40
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 5. 
 
41
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 3. 
 
42
 e-QIP, supra note 1, at 18-19, 25. 
 
43
 Item 4 (Criminal History Record, dated August 3, 2012), at 1-3; Item 8, supra note 2, at 1-2. 
 
44
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
45
 Item 2, supra note 13, at 3. 
 
46
 Item 8, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
47
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”48   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”49 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.50  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”51 
                                                          
48
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
49
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
50
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
51
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”52 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
started as early as 2007. It is unclear if he had insufficient funds to continue making his 
routine monthly payments or if he simply neglected to do so. Vehicles were relinquished 
or repossessed, mortgages and home equity lines went unpaid, and electric utility, 
satellite television, and cellular telephone accounts became delinquent. Accounts were 
placed for collection, and in some instances were charged off.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
                                                          
52
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”53  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. The 
nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 
2007 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
Although Applicant did not attribute any one particular cause to his financial problems, 
he did mention a lay-off, temporary employment, and the death of his wife, as possible 
factors.  Those factors were largely beyond Applicant’s control, but the impact of them 
individually or collectively, were not discussed. Applicant failed to demonstrate what 
actions he has taken to address his delinquent debts, and he has offered no 
documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of them. He essentially 
ignored them, and seemingly continues to do so.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. In the absence of a personal financial statement, or any current information 
pertaining to his monthly income, expenses, and available funds for discretionary 
savings or spending, it is impossible to determine the current state of his financial 
affairs. Because of his failure to confirm payment of even his smallest delinquent 
account (a $70 medical account) and his failure to furnish documentation regarding any 
of the accounts, the overwhelming evidence leads to the conclusion that Applicant’s 
financial problems are not under control. Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing 
to address his delinquent accounts while employed and by failing to make limited, if any, 
efforts of working with his creditors.54 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances 
confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.55 
                                                          
53
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
54
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
55
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
11 
                                      
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 On July 24, 2012, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to certain 
questions pertaining to his financial record. The questions in Section 26 asked if, in the 
past seven years, he had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily 
repossessed; if he had defaulted on any type of loan; if he had bills or debts turned over 
to a collection agency; if he had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt. Appellant answered “no” to those questions. He certified that the responses 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief. The 
responses to those questions were, in fact, incorrect for at that time Appellant had 
several accounts that fell within the stated parameters. As noted above, in his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation, without comment.  
 
 Applicant also responded to questions pertaining to his police record. Several of 
those questions in Section 22 asked if he had “EVER” been charged with any felony 
offenses; or been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. Applicant 
answered “no” to those questions. He certified that the responses were “true, complete, 
and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief. The responses to those questions 
were, in fact, false for, in June 1991, Applicant was charged with two drug-related 
felonies and one drug-related misdemeanor. While no action was taken with respect to 
two of the counts, Applicant was prosecuted for one count. Adjudication was withheld, 
and Applicant was sentenced to probation for four years. He told the OPM investigator 
that he did not realize the information was to be included on the e-QIP. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant failed to admit or deny the allegation.  
 
 Applicant’s responses provide sufficient evidence to examine if his submissions 
were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely the result of 
 
12 
                                      
 
misunderstanding of the true facts, or difficulty in processing the e-QIP on the computer, 
on his part. I have considered the very limited available information pertaining to 
Appellant’s background, professional career, including his military service, and his 
seemingly superficial understanding of his financial matters, in analyzing his actions. 
Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent 
or state of mind when the falsification or omission occurred. As administrative judge, I 
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning Appellant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
falsification or omission occurred.56 While there may have been some confusion in 
Applicant’s mind regarding his police record, his admission as to the financial record is 
unambiguous.  Nevertheless, AG ¶ 16(a) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts,” AG ¶ 17(a) may apply. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if “the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
  
AG ¶ 17(c) partially applies to the allegation regarding the police record, but not 
to the finance record. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(e) do not apply to either question. As noted 
above, 24 years ago, Applicant was involved with drugs, the police, and the court 
system over one isolated drug-related incident. In 2012, over two decades later, he 
failed to accurately respond to the questions pertaining to his “EVER” being involved 
with a drug-related felony. He subsequently told the OPM investigator that he did not 
realize the information was to be included on the e-QIP. He did not admit that his 
intention was to falsify, omit, or conceal the drug-related information. Three years have 
passed since Applicant completed the e-QIP, and he has not been involved in any more 
recent personal conduct issues. His responses to the police record questions were 
about an isolated incident two decades earlier. Substantial periods of time have passed 
since the incident occurred and the e-QIP was completed. While Applicant’s financial 
record response was made at the same time, the issues related to his finances continue 
to this day, so they are considered more significant.  
 
  
                                                          
56
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.57   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He was a 
driver for one employer from October 1993 until he was laid off in July 2010. He has 
been with his current employer since July 2011. He was honorably discharged from the 
U.S. Air Force. He has not been involved with drugs for approximately 24 years.  
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. Applicant has repeatedly 
declared his intentions of bringing his accounts current and repaying them. However, to 
date, he has not. Instead, Applicant has seemingly continued to ignore those delinquent 
accounts. Applicant offered no evidence as to his reputation for reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s long-standing failure over the years to 
voluntarily repay his creditors, even in the smallest amounts, or to arrange even the 
most reasonable payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. Although he made declarations that some accounts had been 
resolved, he offered no documentary evidence to support his declarations. There are 
clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Applicant’s 
actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Considering the absence of confirmed debt resolution and 
elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
                                                          
57
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:58 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of voluntary 
debt reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his delinquent debts. In 
addition, his personal conduct issue, which arose when he falsely reported no 
delinquent debts when, in fact, he had significant debts, continues to be of significance. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
58
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Duplicate of 1.b. 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
