 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06288 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. She is delinquent on a 
judgment, 19 collection accounts, and six charged-off accounts, which total more than 
$26,000. There is no showing of payments having been made on the debts. 
Additionally, when completing a security clearance questionnaire she failed to list any 
derogatory financial information including two repossessed vehicles. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 26, 
2015, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
March 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department 
Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
dated July 30, 2015. The FORM contained eight attachments (Items). On September 1, 
2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. As of November 6, 2015, no response or documents had been 
received. On December 1, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted 20 of the delinquent accounts 
and is unsure about the other seven, but indicated she would investigate those seven 
debts. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old machinist who has worked for a defense contractor 
since May 2013 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 4) She was unemployed 
for 21 months from November 2008 through May 2010, and was unemployed for three 
months from February 2013 through April 2013, when she obtained her current job. 
(Item 4) She provided no information about her duty performance and provided no 
character reference letters. She is separated from her husband and has three children 
ages 23, 26, and 27. (Item 4) 
 Applicant has an unpaid 2007 default judgment (SOR 1.n, $1,032) documented 
by court records. (Item 7) There is one $35 unpaid medical debt (SOR 1.l), 19 unpaid 
collection debts, and six delinquent charged-off accounts. Her unpaid delinquent 
obligations total more than $26,000. The delinquent debts are shown in her May 2013 
and October 2014 credit reports. (Items 5, 6) 
In Applicant’s June 18, 2013 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), she was 
questioned about 22 of the delinquent accounts. (Item 8) She acknowledged her 
financial situation was poor. (Item 8) At the time she completed her PSI, she indicated 
she was unaware of the majority of the accounts. She stated she would attempt to make 
repayment arrangement by July 2014. (Item 8) She indicated she hoped to have a debt 
resulting from a repossessed vehicle paid off by March 2015. Applicant presented no 
documentation showing payment on any of her delinquent obligations. 
 
Applicant was put on notice in the FORM that she could submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanations. The 
FORM also indicated that she had provided no evidence of her efforts to repay or 
otherwise resole her financial delinquencies. She provided no information concerning 
financial counseling or documents establishing her finances are under control. She 
provided no indication as to her annual or monthly income or expenses.  
 
When Applicant completed her May 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) she failed to indicate she had two vehicles 
 
3 
repossessed, had a judgment, and numerous delinquent accounts. She asserts she 
was unaware of her delinquent obligations since the debt information would have been 
mailed to her spouse at a different location. She also asserts she was receiving no 
collection calls or letters demanding payment on past-due or collection accounts. She 
stated she did not list “all” of her collection accounts because she was unaware of 
specific information on the collection accounts. (Item 8) In fact, she failed to indicate any 
financial delinquencies on her e-QIP. (Item 4) In June 2013, the month after she 
completed her e-QIP, she obtained a copy of her credit report. (Item 8) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has an unpaid judgment and 26 other delinquent charged-off and 
collection debts totaling more than $26,000. Even the three delinquent debts of less 
than $75 each and two others of less than $175 each have yet to be paid. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. She has been 
employed with her current employer since May 2013, yet even the smaller debts have 
not been addressed. It is recognized that from 2008 through 2010, she was unemployed 
for 21 months, which adversely affected her finances. She acknowledges her financial 
situation is poor.  
 
In June 2013, Applicant was made aware of the Government’s concerns about 
her delinquent debt when the majority of her delinquent obligations were discussed 
during an interview. At that time, she acknowledged some of the debt, did not recognize 
some of it, and stated that the following month she intended to contact the creditors and 
arrange to pay her delinquent obligations. There is no evidence she did so. She has not 
acted responsibly in addressing her debts.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence she has received credit or financial counseling. 
She has provided no information as to her annual income, annual expenses, or 
demonstrated that her financial problems are under control. She has not shown she has 
a plan to bring her delinquent obligations under control. Without any payments having 
been established, she has failed to show she has made a good-faith effort to satisfy her 
debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. In June 
2013, she was put on notice of the Government’s concern over her delinquent 
obligations. In the two and a half years since her interview, she has failed to document a 
single payment on her delinquent obligations. Given sufficient opportunity to address 
her financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or responsibly under the 
circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
6 
AG & 20(b) has very limited application. She is currently separated from her 
husband and has had periods of separation and reconciliation with him in the past. In 
2013, she was unemployed for three months and more than five years ago, she was 
unemployed for more than 21 months. However, she provided no information as to the 
impact of these periods of unemployment have on her current ability to address her 
delinquent financial obligations.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is no clear showing that her 
financial obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the 
delinquent accounts. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply 
because none of the delinquent obligations have been denied and no documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue has been presented. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
When Applicant completed her May 2013 e-QIP, she failed to list her 
repossessions or any derogatory financial information. She indicated she was not 
getting any calls or letters demanding payment of delinquent obligations. She indicated 
the mail was going to her husband at a different location, and she did not list all her 
collection accounts because she did not have specific information on the accounts. She 
may not have known about “all” of her delinquent accounts, but knew she had sufficient 
financial problems to alert the Government as to some of her delinquent obligations. 
Additionally, she knew about two vehicle repossessions and failed to list them on her e-
QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 
7 
The guideline includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 
and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not provide truthful information about her finances until specifically 
questioned about each one during her June 2013 PSI. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Failing to provide truthful and complete information on a security clearance application 
is never a minor offense. Her untruthful answers cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack 
of candor required of cleared personnel. The Government has an interest in examining 
all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before making a 
clearance decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that 
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or 
convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about 
himself or herself provides an indication of their willingness to report inadvertent security 
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on 
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. 
Applicant’s conduct suggests she is willing to put her personal needs ahead of 
legitimate government interest. I resolve Guideline E, personal conduct, against 
Applicant because she knew of the repossessions and that she had some delinquent 
accounts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on her delinquent accounts. She has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about her delinquent debts since her June 2013 PSI, her January 2015 SOR, 
and the July 2015 FORM. No delinquent debts have been paid and there is no 
documentation she has recently contacted her creditors. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances and facts that could potentially mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. She failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide 
documentation regarding her past efforts to address her delinquent debt. She failed to 
provide such information, and by relying solely on the scant explanation in her response 
to the SOR, she failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her 
past-due obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
worthiness. Additionally, she should have revealed her repossessed vehicles and at 
least some of her delinquent accounts on her e-QIP. A clearance at this time is not 
warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.aa:  Against Applicant   
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
9 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant   
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
