 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------     )  ADP Case No. 14-03323 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling 
$42,809. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence of progress paying or otherwise 
resolving her delinquent debts. Her eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2013, Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of an application for a public trust position 
(SF 86). (Item 3) On October 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to 
find that it is consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. 
(Item 1) The DOD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
whether access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On November 28, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and she 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 1) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated June 25, 2015, was provided to her on July 15, 2015.1 The 
FORM included seven exhibits, which were admitted without objection. (Items 1-7) 
Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
December 10, 2015.    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old medical customer service representative who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since March 2013.3 She received a general 
educational development (GED) certificate in 2002. In 2006, she married, and she has 
been separated from her spouse for several years. Her spouse is incarcerated. Her 
children were born in 2001, 2007, and 2012. She has never served in the military. She 
was unemployed from January 2002 to May 2004, from July 2011 to August 2011, and 
from July 2012 to March 2013. She has had periods of underemployment. There is no 
evidence of felony charges, alcohol abuse, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR allegations are as follows: ¶¶ 1.a and 1.i are charged-off debts 
relating to purchase of vehicles for $20,023 and $8,749; ¶ 1.b is a telecommunications 
collection account for $1,725; ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.l are medical collection accounts or 
delinquent debts for $1,338, $553, $178, and $213; ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h are charged-off 
debts or collection accounts of unspecified origin for $950, $163, and $93; ¶ 1.j is a 
bank collection debt for $495; and ¶ 1.k is an apartment-related collection debt for 
$8,392.    
 
In Applicant’s April 30, 2013 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), she described her history of delinquent debt, and admitted the 
SOR debts. (Item 7) She indicated her spouse was sentenced to eight years of 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated July 2, 2015, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated July 15, 2015.   
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3The sources for the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s February 28, 2013 Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of an application for a public trust position 
(SF 86) and her April 30, 2013 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). 
(Items 2 and 7) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
incarceration for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), and he was expecting to 
remain incarcerated until 2015. As of April 2013, she planned to file for divorce in a few 
months. (Items 3, 7)     
 
Applicant’s FORM noted the absence of other mitigating information. The FORM 
explained that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 2-3)  
 
 The DOHA letter conveying the FORM to Applicant reiterated that Applicant had 
a 30-day opportunity to submit evidence supporting her approval or continuation of 
access to sensitive information. Applicant did not file a response to the FORM.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The standard applicable to trustworthiness cases is 
that set forth in Egan, “regarding security clearances: such a determination ‘may be 
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’” ADP 
Case No. 14-00590 at 3 (Dec. 10, 2014) (citing Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. 
Cir. 2013); ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013)). The Government’s 
authority to restrict access to classified information applies similarly in the protection of 
sensitive, unclassified information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security or other sensitive 
information and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” This decision is based on national security and is not a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s OPM PSI, 
SOR response, and credit reports establish 12 delinquent debts totaling $42,809. In 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained the 
evidentiary-threshold weight given to credit reports in financial cases: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of her SOR debts; however, she provided 
some mitigating information. Four circumstances beyond her control adversely affected 
her finances: (1) separation and possible divorce from her husband; (2) periods of 
unemployment; (3) Applicant’s underemployment; and (4) her husband’s incarceration. 
However, she did not provide enough information about her income and expenses over 
the last three years to prove she acted responsibly under the circumstances.   
 
The SOR was issued on October 28, 2014, and Applicant received ample notice 
of her delinquent debts raising trustworthiness concerns. There is no financial 
documentation relating to her SOR creditors showing maintenance of contact with 
creditors,5 establishment of payment plans, disputes of debts, payments to creditors, or 
other evidence of progress or resolution of her SOR debts. She did not receive financial 
counseling in the previous three years. Mitigation is limited because there is insufficient 
evidence that her financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur. Financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                                                                                                            
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. Applicant is a 33-year-old medical customer service representative who has 
been employed by a defense contractor since March 2013. She has been separated 
from her spouse for several years, and her spouse is incarcerated. She was 
unemployed from January 2002 to May 2004, from July 2011 to August 2011, and from 
July 2012 to March 2013. She has had periods of underemployment. Her ability to 
address her financial problems is limited. There is no evidence of felony charges, 
alcohol abuse, or use of illegal drugs. 
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information is more substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. She has 12 delinquent debts totaling $42,809. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient evidence of progress paying or otherwise resolving her delinquent debts, 
which shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated 
questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. See AG ¶ 18. More evidence of financial progress is necessary to mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
public trust position. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude 
that grant or reinstatement of a public trust position to Applicant is not warranted at this 
time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a public trust position 
in the future. With more effort towards resolving her past-due debts and a documented 
track record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her worthiness for access to sensitive information.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to sensitive information at this time.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge  
