                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-03341
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Attorney at Law, Griffith, Young & Lass 
January 28, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated February 5, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 7, 2014, the Department
of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
“Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 27, 2014, and he requested a
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals Administrative Judge.  This
case was transferred to the West Coast for handling and assigned to this Administrative
Judge on June 24, 2015.  A notice of hearing was issued on August 12, 2015,
scheduling the hearing for September 21, 2015.  At the hearing the Government
presented three exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were
admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented nine exhibits, referred to as
Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, which were admitted without objection.  He also
2
testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on September 29,
2015.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 36 years old and divorced with two children.  He has an Associate’s
degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Senior Technical Account
Manager.  He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s
Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant began working for his current employer in 2006.  He
does not know if they have a drug policy.  (Tr. p. 52.) 
From July 1994 to November 2013, off and on, and at various frequencies, over
a period of nineteen years, Applicant has been involved with the use, possession, sale,
and trafficking of illegal drugs.  He began in high school using and purchasing marijuana
and hanging around the wrong crowd.  It was not long before he was using cocaine.  As
time passed he escalated to the use and purchase of methamphetamine, and he
eventually became a methamphetamine drug dealer.  
Applicant used marijuana from July 1994 to November 2013. He began using
marijuana in high school at times about twice a week at social events.  He continued
using it until about 2000.  During this period he also purchased it a couple of times a
month for his own use.  Applicant estimates that he has used marijuana about 100
times in his life.  (Tr. p. 45.)          
In 1999, Applicant began using and purchasing methamphetamine.  He
estimates that he has used it about 100 times in his life.  (Tr. p 45.)  In July 1999,
Applicant had been using methamphetamine at a friends house.  Applicant left the
house and had driven to the store.  He was standing outside of the store when he was
arrested and charged with two counts of being Under the Influence of a Controlled
Substance and one count of public intoxication.  Applicant was sentenced to three years
probation and fined.  
In 1999, Applicant also began selling methamphetamine for profit.  He was
around people that were making money selling it, and he decided he could do it too.  He
believes he sold it a couple of times a week over a period of two or three years earning
several hundred dollars a week.  He obtained the methamphetamine from a dealer who
was higher up the chain.  Applicant explained that he carried a .38 handgun that he
bought on the street for protection.  The serial numbers on the gun had been scratched
off.  Applicant carried the weapon because he was scared that someone could come
after him.  (Tr. p. 48.) 
3
In November 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with: 1) multiple counts
of being in Possession of a Controlled Substance; 2) Transporting and Selling
Methamphetamine; 3) Possession of a Controlled Substance with a Firearm; and 4)
Altering the Make, Model or Manufacturing number of the Firearm, all Felonies.
Applicant’s gun was confiscated by the police at the time of the arrest.  (Tr. p. 49.)  The
charges were later reduced to a misdemeanor, Possession of a Controlled Substance,
as part of a plea agreement, and he was sentenced to 60 days in jail and five years of
probation.  Applicant complied with all of the court’s sentencing requirements and
obtained an order of dismissal dated September 20, 2013.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
Following his arrest in 2001, Applicant states that he decided to turn his life
around and focus on his career. In 2002 he completed his AAS degree in Computer
Technology and has taken additional classes toward his Bachelor’s degree in
Information Technology.  However, as time passed, and he divorced, he started going
out on the town to meet people and he began using marijuana again.  He believes he
used it about ten times between 2011 and November 2013.  Applicant stated that the
reason he stopped using marijuana in 2013 was because his company asked him to
apply for a security clearance.  Applicant states that he no longer associates with
people who use illegal drugs.      
Applicant now has a girlfriend that he plans to marry who does not use drugs.
He states that he has learned his lesson and really regrets his past behavior.  At no time
does he believe he was ever addicted to any of the illegal drugs, and he never received
any drug treatment.  He states that he had no intention of ever being involved with
illegal drugs again. 
Applicant submitted a statement of intent indicating never to use illegal drugs
again.  In the event that he does, he consents to an automatic revocation of his security
clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
Applicant submitted the results of a urinalysis he took on June 22, 2015, which
were negative for any illegal drugs.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
Applicant’s performance appraisals for the period form June 2008 through April
2015 reflect that he has consistently received high performance ratings.  Specifically, he
“exceeds expectations” or “substantially exceeds expectations” in every category.
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s Manager to whom he reports, and
other professional colleagues and friends, indicate that Applicant is a hard worker, top
producer, and a valued contributor to the company.  He is considered reliable and
trustworthy by all who know him.   He is highly recommended for a security clearance.
(Applicant’s Exhibits F and G.)
Applicant has received a number of awards, certificates, and commendations
related to his work product.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)
4
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; and
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(b)(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18 - 19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
5
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
6
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
Applicant’s extensive nineteen year history of drug involvement with marijuana,
cocaine and methamphetamine is shocking.  His past conduct clearly demonstrates a
lapse in sound judgment and raises serious questions about his judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness.  Applicant was not simply a drug user, he was a drug dealer of a
dangerous narcotic.  He was so seriously ingrained in this criminal conduct that he
carried an illegal weapon with him for protection for fear that he might be attacked.  It is
noted that he has not been involved in drug trafficking for about fourteen years.
However, even after being arrested on two occasions for illegal drugs, he continued to
use marijuana and has used marijuana as recently as two years ago.  His recent use of
marijuana calls into question his maturity, character, judgment, and ability to abide by
the law.    
This conduct shows extreme immaturity and raises serious security concerns
about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement,
Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse; and 25.(c) illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia apply.  Mitigating Condition 26.(b)(4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation applies
here, but is not controlling, given the extent of Applicant’s illegal drug involvement.     
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant is commended for his efforts to
turn his life around.  He has demonstrated that he is a valuable employee.  Most
importantly he has been working to rehabilitate his life after being incarcerated for
serious crimes.  At this time, however, he has not earned the privilege of holding a
security clearance.  He has not yet demonstrated the level of maturity, and
responsibility, or the characteristics expected of an employee who works for the
defense industry and wants access to classified information.  Applicant’s past illegal
conduct is too extensive, too serious and too recent, and a clear indicator of poor
judgment and unreliability that preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this
time.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
7
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
