 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-06830 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, a prospective employee of a defense contractor, failed to mitigate 
security concerns raised by his unresolved delinquent debts. He failed to supply any 
supporting documentation reflecting what steps, if any, he has taken to address his 
past-due debts and take control of his finances. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 Specifically, the SOR alleges six 
delinquent debts and a foreclosure. On August 28, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, 
admitted all the SOR allegations, waived his right to a hearing, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. (Exhibit 1) 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 18, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains five exhibits (Ex. 1 – 5) that are 
admitted without objection into the record. In the FORM, Department Counsel argues 
that “[a]bsent compelling documentation that Applicant has made financial 
arrangements and carried them out to meet his past due financial obligations” he has 
failed to meet his burden in establishing his eligibility for classified information. 
Department Counsel goes on to advise Applicant that he has 30 days from the receipt 
of the FORM to submit documentation in support of his case. He was similarly advised 
in a cover letter accompanying the FORM. See FORM at 3; Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I.  
 
 On October 5, 2015, Applicant acknowledged receiving the FORM. He submitted 
a one-page response, wherein he notes that he was in the process of resolving his 
delinquent accounts; but did not supply any supporting documentation to corroborate 
his claims. Applicant’s Response is admitted without objection as Ex. 6. 
 
 On December 1, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. On my own motion, I 
opened the record to provide him a final opportunity to submit documentation to 
corroborate his claims that he was addressing his past-due debts. See Hx. II. Applicant 
did not to submit any additional information or documentation, and the record closed on 
December 15, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a high school graduate with a degree from a technical school. He 
was employed from 1993 to 2012 by a casino, but was fired for “creating a hostile work 
environment.” (Ex. 2) During his security clearance background interview, Applicant 
explained he was fired by the casino for making disparaging comments about a “high 
roller,” who was the ex-husband of his then girlfriend. (Ex. 3) After being fired, Applicant 
was unemployed for approximately 18 months. In March 2014, Applicant completed and 
submitted a security clearance application in connection with his prospective 
employment with a defense contractor. He has not held a security clearance in the past.  
 
Applicant claims that his financial problems largely relate to his past marriage. He 
twice refinanced his home to pay for debts incurred by his former wife. (Ex. 3) In his 
Answer, Applicant claims that his ex-wife refinanced the home without his permission at 
a high interest rate at a time when housing prices were rising. He was unable to keep 
up with the new mortgage payments, defaulted on the mortgage obligation, and the 
home was foreclosed. In his security clearance application, Applicant disclosed his 
delinquent mortgage debt and noted that he was $12,000 in arrears. A judicial 
foreclosure order reflects that the house was foreclosed in 2014. As of the date of the 
foreclosure, Applicant owed over $200,000 on the property. The home’s fair market 
value was approximately $156,000. (Ex. 6) Applicant states in his Answer and 
Response that the resolution of this matter is still pending. In his Response, Applicant 
claims that he is in the process of resolving the six delinquent SOR debts, including a 
$3,400 state tax lien. He did not supply documentation to corroborate his claims, nor 
regarding whether he has received financial or debt counseling. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009), 
“[o]nce a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a 
strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding individuals who accumulate and fail to address 
delinquent debt is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
The financial considerations security “concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
in satisfaction of his or her debts.”2 The concern also encompasses financial 
irresponsibility, which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
The record evidence reflects that Applicant has a history of not meeting his 
financial obligations and, at a minimum, has been unable to pay his debts. This record 
evidence raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
 The financial considerations guideline lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the security concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s financial situation appears to be attributable to problems in his former 
marriage and 18-months of unemployment. Assuming such matters were largely 
beyond his control, Applicant did not supply supporting documentation of what, if any, 
steps he took to resolve his delinquent mortgage debt before his former home was 
foreclosed and is currently taking to resolve his past-due debts. Accordingly, I find that 
AG 20(b) is partially applicable. Based on the record before me, none of the other 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to this nation’s secrets.3 Applicant failed to meet his burden. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F. I 
gave due consideration to all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case, 
including Applicant’s candor about his financial situation throughout the security 
clearance process. Furthermore, as already noted, his finances were negatively 
impacted by a failed marriage and termination from a long-held job followed by 18 
months of unemployment. He claims that, notwithstanding these matters, he has acted 
responsibly in addressing his past-due debts. Yet, after repeatedly being advised of the 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
4 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
need to supply supporting documentation, he did not submit any documentation to 
corroborate his claims. Accordingly, after weighing the favorable and unfavorable 
evidence, Applicant’s past-due debts and recent foreclosure of his home continue to 
raise a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts and 
questions about his current eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
