 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-07041 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the security concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, but 
failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 11, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 10, 2015. 
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 15, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled by video teleconference on 
January 11, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy 
of an exhibit list that was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open until January 20, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents. He submitted documents that were marked AE D through L and 
they were admitted into evidence without objection, and the record closed.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 14, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 2.a, which he denied. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is a high school graduate and earned an 
associate’s degree in 2007. He was married for a short period in 1996 and divorced. He 
has two grown children from previous relationships. He remarried in 2000. He has two 
stepchildren, ages 24 and 21. The younger stepchild has a part-time job, attends 
school, and lives at home. The older stepchild lives at home and does not work or 
contribute to the household expenses. His wife is not employed. Applicant served in the 
military from 1987 to 2007, retiring in the paygrade E-6.2  
 
Applicant stated that he participated in “financial training” in 2004. He filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 and had his debts discharged in June 2006. He could not 
recall exactly the amount of debts discharged in bankruptcy, but estimated it was about 
$12,000 to $15,000. Applicant stated after the bankruptcy he took several financial 
courses and learned that he needed to come up with a financial plan and adhere to it.3 
 
Applicant attributed his recent financial problems to his father-in-law’s illness and 
subsequent death in 2013. His father-in-law was diagnosed with cancer in 2005. 
Applicant stated he took trips to another state to assist him while he was sick. He 
estimated he visited his father-in-law about once a year.4  
 
The judgments and debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports 
from June 2015, June 2014, June 2013, and court documents.5 
                                                          
1 HE II is Department Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 22-26, 54-56; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 26-31. 
 
4 GE 8. 
 
5 GE 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted the 2013 judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,028). The judgment is for 
rent owed after moving from an apartment. In his answer to the SOR, he stated he was 
“currently exploring viable methods to contest these charges.” He was hopeful he could 
negotiate a “buyout.” At this hearing, he stated he had not done anything to resolve this 
judgment.6  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in May 2013 and was 
interviewed by a government investigator as part of a background investigation in June 
2013. During the interview, Applicant acknowledged all of the delinquent debts in the 
SOR, except the 2013 judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b. Regarding the 2010 judgment listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($7,026), he indicated he was offered a settlement of $2,000. He was unable 
to pay the amount. At his hearing, he acknowledged that he has not had contact with 
the creditor for at least two years and is hopeful he can qualify for a loan to repay this 
debt. The debt is unresolved.7 
 
 Applicant testified that he has been making $50 payments to the creditor in SOR 
¶ 1.d ($697), a collection account from June 2015 for a dental bill. After his hearing, 
Applicant provided an invoice for the debt dated April 30, 2014, which shows a balance 
of $1,396. In a post-hearing letter, Applicant stated the current balance of the debt is 
$697, as alleged. If Applicant is making consistent monthly payments of $50, the current 
balance from the date of the SOR should be $300 less. He did not provide documentary 
proof that he is making the payments and has reduced the balance owed from the 
amount alleged on the SOR.8 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($200, delinquent since March 2012) is a collection 
account for a rental car. Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he made 
payments on this debt, but the creditor has not credited them. In his answer, he stated: 
“I am currently investigating this matter and have made no further payments until I have 
ascertained why the previous amounts were not credited.” At this hearing, Applicant 
stated he has done nothing to reduce the balance of the debt and indicated his wife 
handles the finances. After his hearing, he provided a document that shows on January 
18, 2016, he paid $260 to the creditor. The creditor indicated if the payment cleared the 
debt would be resolved.9  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.f ($136, delinquent since November 2013) and ¶ 1.g 
($107, delinquent since November 2013) are to the same cable company. Applicant 
stated that he has been making small payments to resolve the debts, but had not made 
payments to any creditors since March 2015. After the hearing, he provided a document 
                                                          
6 Tr. 43-44; GE 8. 
 
7 Tr. 46-48; GE 1, 4, 5; AE D. 
 
8 Tr. 44-46; AE C, D and L. 
 
9 Tr. 48-49; AE E and L. 
 
4 
 
 
to show that on January 15, 2016, he paid $244 to the creditor, who agreed that if the 
check was not returned the two debts were considered satisfied.10 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h is a collection account for a gas bill ($539, delinquent 
since March 2009). After the hearing, Applicant provided copies of documents showing 
that four $20 payments were made in 2013. No other information was provided 
regarding the resolution of this debt.11 
 
The collection account in SOR ¶ 1.i is for a cell phone bill ($1,469 delinquent 
since May 2011). After the hearing, Applicant provided documents to show that in 2013 
he made four payments of $20 towards this debt. No other information was provided 
regarding the resolution of this debt.12 
 
The collection account in SOR ¶ 1.j (balance alleged $1,930, delinquent since 
December 2010) is for a cell phone bill. After the hearing, Applicant provided a 
settlement offer from the creditor dated December 10, 2010. In it the creditor reflected 
the principal balance owed was $1,930.90 with a collection fee of $347.57, with the 
balance due of $2,278.56. Applicant’s post hearing statement said that the original debt 
was $2,278 and he currently owed $1,930, and that he made a payment of $347. This is 
inconsistent with the document from the creditor. Applicant provided no proof he has 
made any payments on this debt.13  
 
During his background interview Applicant indicated he was making small 
monthly payments towards some of the above debts and once he paid other debts he 
would pursue these more aggressively. At his hearing, Applicant stated that he knows 
he has paid something on the debts, but does not recall how much. He stated he has 
not made any payments on any debts since March 2015.14  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant provided information that he is paying a debt to a creditor 
with a balance owed of $1,397 for a car purchase and the debt will be resolved in 
February 2016.15 This debt was not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of a budget. The budget includes repayment of the 
dental debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) and federal and state taxes. Applicant explained his 2009 and 
2010 federal and state income tax returns were not filed until 2013. He testified that he 
was notified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in 2012 of the failure to file the 
                                                          
10 Tr. 49-51; AE F and L. 
 
11 Tr. 51-53; AE G and L. 
 
12 Tr. 51-53; AE H and L. 
 
13 Tr. 51-53; AG I and L. 
 
14 Tr. 51-53; GE 8. 
 
15 Tr. 54; AE J and K. 
 
5 
 
 
returns. He stated that he signed the tax returns and believed his wife had timely filed 
and mailed the tax returns. He delayed filing the returns after he received the IRS notice 
in 2012 because he was permitted an opportunity to reduce the amount the IRS claimed 
he owed. Applicant stated he owed several thousand dollars for delinquent taxes and he 
has been making monthly payments of $400 to the IRS and $200 for delinquent state 
taxes. Applicant attributed the tax problems to his wife. He stated that in the last two 
months he has taken over handling the finances and that he is in the process of fixing 
his financial problems.16  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated:  
 
Within approximately the last six months I have made significant strides to 
correct my financial difficulties. Within that time I have paid all 
rents/utilities/expenses owed, have doubled my credit rating, and reduced 
my previous debts (despite the cost of moving to a new state).17 At my 
current rate of payment I will have all debts corrected by June 2017. I 
implore you to overlook my past financial mistakes, as I am making every 
effort to rectify them in an honorable way.  
 
This statement contracts Applicant’s hearing testimony that he has not made payments 
on any debts since March 2015. 
 
 Applicant retired from the military in October 2007 and was unemployed until 
March 2008. Otherwise he was employed full-time except from November 2008 to 
March 2009; February 2010 until March 2011; and June to September 2011. Applicant 
worked for a federal contractor, Company A, from March 2013 until his termination for 
cause in March 2015. He was accused of violating company policies regarding 
proprietary and confidential information and conflict of interest matters. He has been 
employed since March 2015 by a federal contractor.18  
 
The termination of employment caused Applicant to forfeit a retention bonus of 
$7,000. Applicant provided a letter from his immediate supervisor at Company A 
certifying that Applicant did not violate company policies, but rather was completing an 
assignment to prevent inconvenience to a customer of Company A. He had permission 
from Company A to complete the assignment at home and was authorized, as he had 
been in the past, to email himself certain files. The files were not proprietary or 
confidential. His former supervisor’s letter indicated that at that time Applicant had 
received employment offers from other companies and was offered a retention bonus 
for his services from Company A. Applicant continued employment with Company A. 
                                                          
16 Tr. 26, 35-43, 49, 54; AE C. I have not considered Applicant’s failure to timely file his 2009 and 2010 
federal and state tax returns for disqualifying purposes, but will consider the information when analyzing 
the whole-person and his credibility. 
 
17 Applicant testified that he moved to a new state in March 2015. 
 
18 Tr. 56-68; GE 2.  
 
6 
 
 
After he completed the task for the customer, which required working the weekend and 
off-duty hours, a week passed, then 30 minutes after all backup procedures were 
completed, Applicant was notified that he would be terminated by Company A and not 
receive the bonus.19 
 
The facility security officer for Applicant’s current employer provided a letter 
explaining that Company A lost a federal contract to his employer, Company B. He 
explained that the accusations levied against Applicant by Company A are consistent 
with how Company A has handled the contract transition. He stated Company A has 
made it as difficult as possible for his company, Company B, and the employees that 
were leaving Company A to work for Company B.20 
 
The vice president of operations (VPO) for where Applicant is now employed 
testified on his behalf. The VPO explained their company is a subcontractor of 
Company B. He confirmed that he sought to hire employees from Company A so they 
could use their experience from having already worked on the contract. He confirmed 
that Company A has done everything possible to make the transition difficult, including 
suing Company B three times and his company once and also suing individuals who 
were formerly employed by Company A. He believes the termination allegations against 
Applicant are consistent with Company A’s practice.21  
 
The VPO stated that Applicant is a valued employee and works hard to take care 
of their customers. He valued Applicant’s work ethic and pride in his work. He did not 
have first-hand knowledge about Applicant’s finances, but believes he is frugal and tries 
to save money. He trusts Applicant to handle classified information.22 
 
Applicant testified that the government has benefited from his skills, and he has 
always been conscientious regarding security procedures.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
19 Tr. 26, 56-68, 73-76; AE A. 
 
20 AE B. 
 
21 Tr. 74-76. 
 
22 Tr. 74-76. 
 
7 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
8 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.23 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant had debts discharged through bankruptcy in 2006. He has two 
judgments that are unpaid and delinquent debts that were unpaid or unresolved. His 
delinquencies began in 2009. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
                                                          
23 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
9 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2006. He 
accumulated new delinquent debts beginning in 2009. Although he had been on notice 
of the security concerns arising from his debts since receiving the SOR in July 2015, he 
only paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g after his hearing. He failed to provide 
sufficient evidence that he is currently resolving the remaining judgments and 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s conduct is recent and there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that it is unlikely to recur. His failure to address his delinquent debts casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 Although not specifically raised, it appears some of Applicant’s financial problems 
were due to periods of unemployment. He also attributed his financial problems to 
expenses related to visiting his father-in-law while he was ill. His father-in-law passed 
away in 2013. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed 
to provide sufficient evidence of actions he took to resolve his delinquent debts since 
2013 when his father-in-law passed away and since he has been employed full time. In 
his 2013 interview, he stated he made some small payments towards some debts. He 
later provided documents to show the 2013 payments. At his hearing, he admitted he 
had not made payments on any debts since March 2015. He indicated he was making 
payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, but the document he provided does not show he 
has made payments toward the debt. In his post-hearing submission, he indicated the 
balance owed was the amount alleged in the SOR, which is incorrect if he had been 
making payments. He indicated he made a payment of $347 on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j, 
which is inconsistent with the information on the document he provided. After his 
hearing he paid three debts. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence that he has 
acted responsibly regarding resolving his financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies. 
 
 Applicant resolved the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1g after his 
hearing. The others delinquent debts remain unpaid and unresolved. He indicated that 
before and after his bankruptcy he received financial counseling. He has a budget, but 
indicated that only in the last two months did he take over handling the finances from his 
wife, to whom he attributed the problem. He stated he was making payments on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, but the document provided does not support his statement. He 
claimed he made a $347 payment toward the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j, but the document does 
not support his statement. None of the remaining alleged debts are resolved. Applicant 
did not provide a reasonable plan for resolving his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies to the extent that he sought some financial counseling, but there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude his financial problems are under control or are being resolved.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant paid the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. Because those 
debts are resolved, I find for him regarding these debts, but do not find he initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditors because he did not pay them until after 
his hearing. He made some small payments on some of the debts in 2013, but failed to 
provide evidence of what current actions he is taking to resolve the remaining 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f and 1.g. It does not apply to the 
other remaining delinquent debts. Applicant indicated he was looking for a way to 
contest the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.b but did not dispute any other evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) 
has not been raised.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but it is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary 
information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information.  
 
Applicant was terminated by a former employer that claimed he violated company 
policy regarding proprietary and confidential information. Applicant’s immediate 
supervisor, who directed him to complete the specific assignment confirmed Applicant 
did not violate company policy, but rather completed the task as directed and there was 
no proprietary information used. Company A terminated Applicant after it lost a 
government contract to another company and then denied Applicant a bonus he earned. 
The evidence does not support that Applicant violated company policy regarding 
proprietary or confidential information. The above disqualifying condition does not apply. 
Applicant successfully refuted the personal conduct allegation. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He retired from the military after 20 years of service. 
The VPO of his company believes he is a hard worker and can be trusted with a 
security clearance. Applicant had his debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2006. Applicant 
has numerous delinquent debts that are not paid or resolved. He admitted during his 
hearing that he had not made payments on any of the alleged debts, except one, since 
March 2015. The delinquencies date back to 2009. He paid several debts after his 
hearing. Although he experienced periods of unemployment and an illness in the family, 
he failed to provide evidence that he has a realistic plan for resolving the debts. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to show he has an established track record 
of being fiscally responsible. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
financial considerations. Applicant successfully refuted the personal conduct 
allegations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
