 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05158 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on five 
collection accounts and is more than $41,000 past due on his mortgage. There is no 
showing of payments having been made on the debts. Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 8, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
February 12, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated July 19, 2015. The FORM contained four attachments (Items). 
On August 31, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. As of October 27, 2015, no response or documents 
had been received. On November 2, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted five of the six delinquent 
obligations. The five delinquent accounts total approximately $6,000. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old labor supervisor who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 1996 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 2) He is 
single, never married, and has one 25-year-old child. 
 
On Applicant’s December 2012 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he did not indicate any financial delinquencies. The SOR alleged 
he was more than $41,000 past due on a $73,000 mortgage. He indicated the debt was 
in a modification trial plan. (Item 1) He provided an Order for Second and Subsequent 
Listing of Conciliation Conference. The form states the parties have entered into a 
traditional modification trial plan. However, the form also states the agreement will not 
result in the loan being brought current. A conciliation conference was set for February 
15, 2015. There is no indication Applicant attended that conference or agreed to any 
requirements from that conference. (Item 1)  
 
Applicant admitted being delinquent on three collection accounts and a past-due 
account, which totaled approximately $6,000 and indicated he was working to pay the 
debts. (Item 1) He was put on notice in the FORM that he could submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanations. The 
FORM stated he had provided no supporting documentation as to his assertions of 
payment. No documents were received. 
 
Applicant denied an $812 collection debt (SOR 1.f) owed to the city’s family 
support account. (Item 1) He provided no documentation related to the denial. In August 
2014, he completed a “Tools for Financial Growth” workshop, but failed to provide any 
information what was learned at the workshop.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
4 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is more than $41,000 past due on his mortgage and has four collection 
accounts and one past-due account, which total more than $6,000. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer for 19 years. In December 2014, he was made 
aware of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. At that time, he 
acknowledged five of his six delinquent obligations and indicated he was working to pay 
off his debts. He provided no information he has paid any of the obligations, attended 
the February 2015 conciliation conference, or complied with any requirements set forth 
in that conference. He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. In 
August 2014, he completed a “Tools for Financial Growth” workshop, but failed to 
indicate what he had learned from that workshop. He has not demonstrated that his 
financial problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under control. 
He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. In 
December 2014, he was notified of the Government’s concern over his delinquent 
obligations. Given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, Applicant 
has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant provided no information concerning factors 
beyond his control. By failing to show any payments he has failed to show he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. He provided no information about 
the financial growth workshop he attended. Additionally, there is no clear showing that 
his financial obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the 
delinquent accounts. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
Although he disputed the $800 collection account (SOR 1.f) he did failed to provide 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his December 2014 SOR. No delinquent debts 
have been paid and there is no documentation Applicant has recently contacted his 
creditors. He provided no documentation that he attended the February 2015 
conciliation conference or is in compliance with any requirements from that conference.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on the scant explanation in response to the SOR, he 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
