KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is nothing to show what the parties discussed after the close of the hearing.  In
his Decision, the Judge did not elaborate upon the length of time at issue, nor did he state what
else, if anything, the parties had discussed after the hearing. We can not resolve Applicant’s due
process argument.  We cannot say how long the Judge gave Applicant to submit additional
evidence.  We cannot resolve Applicant’s claim that he was told that he did not need to submit
his financial plan as executed. Adverse decision remanded
CASENO: 14-03884.a1
DATE: 01/14/2016
DATE: January 14, 2016
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03884
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 23, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On November 15, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we remand the case to the Judge.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has raised an issue of due process.  In doing so, he asserts matters from outside
the record, which we generally are not able to consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we will
consider new evidence insofar as it bears upon threshold issues of due process or jurisdiction.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2015).    Applicant words his argument in the
following way:
I was told I did not need to submit the plan I have executed.  The Judge did not allow
me to present the financial plan and evidence of the repayment schedule which I
have taken great steps to clear up the debt and that I have executed.  Unfortunately,
the budget requested did not contain all steps I have taken towards resolving the
debts in good faith and paying overdue creditors[.] Appeal Brief at 1.
This issue may have originated in some comments that the Judge made toward the beginning
of the hearing.  He stated to Applicant the following, sua sponte:  
[I]t’s going to be at least a month if not two before I can write this up, which means
if you get partway back home today and say, Why didn’t I send the Judge a copy of
this or add a copy of the receipt that shows that I paid that, you send it to the
Government . . . Because sometimes people are making payments, and they made
one or two payments, which is a good start, but not enough for me to . . . rule in their
favor, but during the intervening time after the hearing, they were able to make
additional payments, enough so that they were able to get a clearance, because
normally my belief is that if somebody has made one or two payments on a debt,
they may or may not continue making their payments . . . If a person has made
payments for  three months or four months, I believe that they will continue making
their payments until the agreement has been paid off.  Tr. at 8-9.
He later advised that he would keep the record open “for probably two months” in order to give
Applicant a chance to submit additional evidence concerning his debts.  Tr. at 15.  After Applicant
3
completed his direct testimony, the Judge stated that “if you’ve got an arrangement with [creditors]
and you’re making your payments on the arrangement, the Government’s concern goes away.”  Tr.
at 30.  During closing argument, Applicant’s personal representative requested an opportunity to
present evidence of debt resolution.  Tr. at 55.  The Judge and Department Counsel then engaged
in the following colloquy:
[Department Counsel]: Do you want to set a date? You’ve mentioned two months.
Do you want to fix that?
[Judge]: Well, basically we’ll go off the record, and we’ll talk about that.
[Department Counsel]: Okay.
[Judge]: Time is now 12:46.  We’re off the record.  (Whereupon, at 12:46 p. m., the
hearing was adjourned).  Tr. at 56.
There is nothing in the record to show what the parties discussed after the close of the hearing.  In
his Decision, the Judge stated that he had given Applicant additional time in which to submit
evidence but that Applicant had not done so.  Decision at 2.  He did not elaborate upon the length
of time at issue, nor did he state what else, if anything, the parties had discussed after the hearing.
Under the circumstances, we are not able to resolve Applicant’s due process argument.  We
cannot say with any degree of certainty how long the Judge gave Applicant to submit additional
evidence.  More fundamentally, we cannot resolve Applicant’s claim that he was told by the Judge
or by some other party that he did not need to submit his financial plan as executed.  Department
Counsel has not filed a Reply Brief, and in any case we do not have fact-finding authority.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  Therefore, we conclude that the best
resolution to this case is to remand it to the Judge to permit the parties to submit additional
documentary evidence, with the proviso that no piece of such evidence will post date September 8,
2015, which was the first business day that was two months after the adjournment of the hearing.
After the parties have had an opportunity to submit evidence, the Judge will issue a new Decision.
Applicant’s other argument is not ripe for adjudication.
The case is REMANDED.       
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
