 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03774 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by his familial and other personal 
connections to Pakistan. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On February 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns 
under the foreign influence guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish his eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
 
 On July 30, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed to hearing. After conferring with the parties, I 
scheduled Applicant’s hearing for October 22, 2015. To ensure Applicant was provided 
fair notice of the evidence to be offered against him at hearing and to alleviate the 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
danger of unfair surprise to either party, I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties 
to exchange documents prior to the hearing. See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I (case 
management order and scheduling correspondence).  
 
 The parties exchanged documents, including their respective requests for 
administrative notice, well in advance of the hearing. The parties also noted in writing 
that they did not object to the factual matters each was requesting for administrative 
notice. See Hx. II and III.  
 
 The hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits 
(Ex.) 1 – 3. Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is Ex. 3, which 
summarizes facts about Pakistan taken from publically available U.S. Government 
reports or official statements of key U.S. Government officials (collectively referred to 
hereinafter as “source documents”). Applicant testified, called his wife as a witness, and 
offered Ex. A – G. Applicant’s request for administrative notice is Ex. A and the source 
documents cited in the request were collectively marked Ex. B. All exhibits were 
admitted into the record without objection.2 The transcript was received by the Defense 
Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) on November 5, 2015. 
 
 On November 4, 2015, I reopened the record to provide Department Counsel the 
opportunity to submit of the source documents cited in her request for administrative 
notice, Ex. 3. See ISCR Case No. 14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (case remanded 
because source documents not included in the record).3 Applicant was afforded a 
further opportunity to review the source documents cited by the Government and submit 
any objections, comments, or matters challenging the matters requested by the 
Government for administrative notice. Applicant was also given the opportunity to 
provide any additional matters for my consideration. See Hx. IV  
 
 Department Counsel timely submitted portions of the source documents 
referenced in Ex. 3. These documents were collectively marked Hx. V. Applicant did not 
object to Hx. V, and it was admitted into the record. No additional matters were 
submitted for my consideration and the record closed on November 20, 2015.  
 
 
                                                          
2 In cases, such as the present one, where the parties knowingly waive any objection or stipulate to the 
accuracy, reliability, and relevancy of the facts summarized in a request for administrative notice, such a 
document could be admitted as a summary of the pertinent facts contained in the source document(s). 
See generally, Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.19 (Federal Rules of Evidence (F.R.E.) shall serve as a 
guide in DOHA proceedings and technical rules of evidence may be relaxed to permit the development of 
a full and complete record); F.R.E. 201; F.R.E. 1006. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03112 (App. Bd. Nov. 
3, 2015), Board affirms adverse decision regarding individual who previously held a Pakistani security 
clearance and maintained substantial ties to Pakistan, including a family member in a high-level military 
position. No source documents about Pakistan were offered, but the Government’s administrative notice 
request, which summarized the relevant facts taken from source documents, was admitted as a summary. 
 
3 Recently, after receiving “some two dozen additional documents” that addressed the challenged matters 
accepted for administrative notice, the Board affirmed the adverse decision. ISCR Case No. 14-01655 at 
2 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015).  
 
3 
 
 
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
 DOHA administrative judges may accept for administrative notice 
uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts regarding a foreign country derived from official 
U.S. Government reports, the official position of appropriate federal agencies, or the 
pertinent statement(s) of key U.S. Government officials. The source document(s) (or, at 
a minimum, the relevant portion(s) of the source document) that a judge relies upon for 
administrative notice regarding a foreign country should be included in the record for 
potential appellate review regarding the accuracy and relevancy of the fact(s) 
administratively noticed. See generally, ISCR Case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 
2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007).  
 
Additionally, as Department Counsel correctly notes, upon request of the 
administrative judge, the proponent of a fact for administrative notice must provide the 
source documents, either the pertinent parts or the full document, to allow the judge to 
assess the reliability, accuracy, and relevancy of any fact proposed for administrative 
notice. See Hx. V at 4 (“[T]he Government recognizes an Administrative Judge’s 
responsibility to confirm the facts for which administrative notice is sought warrant such 
a status.”) After reviewing the matters admitted into the record, the following relevant 
facts regarding Pakistan are accepted for administrative notice: 
 
The United States has had diplomatic relations with Pakistan since Pakistan’s 
creation in 1947. Over the decades, the two countries’ relationship has been guided by 
their common interests in a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region. The United States 
is Pakistan’s largest trading partner and one of the largest sources of foreign direct 
investment in Pakistan. (Ex. A at 1 - 2; Ex. B at 1, 6, 8)  
 
In 2013, at the invitation of President Obama, Pakistan’s Prime Minister paid an 
official visit to Washington to mark the strength of U.S.-Pakistani relations and advance 
the countries shared interest in a stable, secure, and prosperous Pakistan and the 
region. (Ex. A at 2; Ex. B at 5 - 13) President Obama, in his opening remarks, said:  
 
Pakistani Americans here in the United States are enormous contributors 
to the growth and development of the United States. And my hope is, is 
that despite what inevitably will be some tensions between our two 
countries and occasional misunderstandings between our two countries, 
that the fundamental goodwill that is shared between the Pakistani people 
and the American people, that that will be reflected in our governments' 
relationships and that we will continue to make progress in the coming 
years. (Ex. B at 17) 
 
The September 11, 2001, attacks in the United States by al-Qaida led to closer 
coordination between Pakistan and the United States on security and stability in South 
Asia. Pakistan pledged cooperation with the United States in counterterrorism efforts, 
which included locating and shutting down terrorist camps within Pakistan’s borders, 
 
4 
 
 
cracking down on extremist groups, and withdrawing support for the Taliban regime in 
Afghanistan. (Ex. A at 1 - 2; Ex. B at 1, 10) 
 
The United States remains concerned about the continued presence of terrorist 
and other extremist groups in Pakistan. These groups operate, plan, and conduct 
domestic, regional, and global attacks from safe havens within Pakistan. In 2014, 
Pakistan launched military operations to eliminate these terrorist safe havens. Although 
the military operations had a significant impact, some terrorist organizations continue to 
operate within Pakistan. The presence of these groups and other armed elements in 
Pakistan pose a significant threat to U.S. citizens and U.S. interests. These groups have 
carried out attacks against the United States, the Pakistani government, and the citizens 
of both countries. The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-
essential travel to Pakistan because of the potential danger posed by the presence of 
these groups and other armed elements. (Gx. 3 at 3 - 4; Hx. V at 9, 11, 25) 
 
The U.S. State Department’s recent human rights report on Pakistan reflects the 
reported commission of human rights violations by elements within Pakistan and the 
Pakistani government. The report also notes that the most serious human rights 
problems in Pakistan include extrajudicial and targeted killings, disappearances, and 
torture. The report states that corruption within the Pakistani government and police is a 
persistent problem, and the lack of accountability and failure to prosecute these abuses 
has led to a culture of impunity. (Gx. 3 at 4; Hx. V at 27-28) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant was born in Pakistan. He and his wife married in 1993 in Pakistan. She 
was also born in Pakistan, but has lived in the United States for the past 25 years and is 
a naturalized U.S. citizen. She works as a public school teacher. Applicant’s three 
children were born in the United States. They have lived in the United States 
continuously since their births and attend U.S. schools. Applicant immigrated to the 
United States in 1999, to provide his family with the opportunities that do not exist in 
Pakistan. He owns a home in the United States, which he has lived in with his family for 
the past 12 years. (Tr. at 16-19; Ex. 1)  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2008. Before taking the oath of allegiance, 
Applicant read it over and considered its significance. Applicant’s understanding was 
that, in taking the oath, he was making a solemn promise to the United States and he 
has tried to keep that promise. He credibly testified that his immediate family in the 
United States is the most important thing in his life and he would never do anything to 
jeopardize them or the life they have in the United States. (Tr. at 20-21, 36-37) His wife, 
oldest son, and others also noted the high importance that Applicant places on his 
immediate family and the deep roots he has established in the United States. (Tr. at 74-
75, 79-81, 86-89; Ex. F) He does not have any foreign bank accounts, property, or 
investments. His monthly net income is over $6,500, with U.S. assets totaling over 
$425,000. He votes in U.S. elections. (Tr. at 21-22; 58-59, 63-64; Ex. E) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, for over two 
years. He has had access and handled sensitive, proprietary, and ITAR4-controlled 
information on various projects for over ten years, including for the past two years as a 
federal contractor on defense projects. He receives quarterly security briefings 
regarding his security responsibilities and obligations, to include reporting suspicious 
contacts. He does not discuss his work outside the workplace with anyone, to include 
his immediate family. Current and former co-workers and supervisors write that 
Applicant is an exemplary employee, who has exhibited honesty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. (Tr. at 64-66, 70, 89; Answer at 2; Ex. F) His current manager writes: 
 
[Applicant] always follows company policies, procedures, and ethical 
guidelines, even though at times, they may be inconvenient. [He] asks 
before proceeding if he is unsure whether a course of action would stray 
from these principles. He is honest and accountable for his actions. For 
example, when he accidentally broke an expensive piece of equipment, he 
immediately notified me of this occurrence. . . . [He] is also extremely 
reliable. He comes to and leaves work at the established times and does 
not have sudden unexplained absences. He follows through with what he 
says he will do and I fully trust him to carry out his work independently. I 
highly recommend [him] for the requested security clearance. (Ex. F at 5) 
 
Applicant is active in his community. A local community leader writes that 
Applicant and his family can always be counted on to organize programs at their local 
police station. The witness goes on to state that Applicant is “very humble, hardworking, 
honest, and a trustworthy individual.” (Ex. F at 2) 
 
 Applicant’s parents and siblings are resident-citizens of Pakistan. His parents are 
retired, elderly, and in poor health. His siblings primarily work in the private sector in 
Pakistan. None of Applicant’s foreign family members work directly for the Pakistani 
government or military, but one of his brothers does work for a company that is partly 
owned by the Pakistani government and a sister is a public school teacher. Applicant 
has provided some financial support to his family in Pakistan. He speaks to his family in 
Pakistan frequently and recently traveled to Pakistan to visit his family. He has never 
told his family in Pakistan who he works for or what he does for a living. If any of his 
foreign family members were to make inquiries of this nature, he would immediately 
report it to his security manager as required by his security training. (Tr. at 22-35, 39-53, 
60) Applicant testified as follows on this topic: 
 
Department Counsel:  Okay.  Your Counsel had previously indicated, had 
asked you about whether or not you had ever been approached about 
your job, or whatnot, but what would you do if any of your relatives were, 
specifically, contacted by somebody seeking information about what you 
do for a living? 
 
                                                          
4 International Traffic in Arms Regulations. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant [sitting up straight and his voice picking up, adamantly states]:5  
I will not provide them any information, at any cost. 
 
Department Counsel:  And -- 
 
Applicant:  And I will report to my Security Office, because it will concern 
me. (Tr. at 59) 
 
 Applicant’s in-laws have lived in the United States for over 20 years, and live 
close to Applicant and his family. His father-in-law worked for the U.S. Government for 
over 20 years. His wife’s only close living relative in Pakistan is her mother’s sister-in-
law’s brother, who she and Applicant refer to as her “uncle.” This uncle was a civilian 
employee of the Pakistani military before retiring. Applicant and his wife have provided 
some financial support to her uncle, and she speaks with her uncle on a regular basis. 
(Tr. at 53-55, 62-63, 72-78, 85; Ex. 1; Ex. F at 8, 11) 
 
 Applicant, who lived and worked in Pakistan for 34 years before immigrating to 
the United States, has a number of individuals he considers friends in Pakistan. One of 
these friends works for a company that is partly owned by the Pakistani government. 
Applicant used to speak to his friends in Pakistan on a somewhat regular basis, but less 
often in recent years. He has not provided these individuals any financial support and 
none are aware for whom he works. (Tr. at 56-58; Ex. 1) 
 
 Applicant disclosed his foreign connections in Pakistan, including the frequency 
of contact and financial support, on his security clearance application. He also 
discussed these matters during the ensuing background investigation. He submitted 
documentation regarding the amount of financial support he has provided his family in 
Pakistan and explained that the amount of money he has sent his family is relatively 
small in comparison to his U.S. income and assets. (Tr. at 27-30; Ex. 1 - 2; Ex. C - E)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Observations in parentheses regarding Applicant’s demeanor are from my personal observations at 
hearing and recorded in contemporaneously taken notes.  
 
7 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that due process proceedings 
are conducted “in a fair, timely and orderly manner.” Directive ¶ E3.1.10. Judges make 
certain that an applicant receives fair notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable 
opportunity to litigate those issues, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case 
No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the 
paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 
2009), “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
8 
 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.6 
 
 An individual is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections to and interest in a foreign country. Instead, in 
assessing an individual’s vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; the intelligence gathering history of 
that government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.7  
 
 The United States and Pakistan are partners in areas of mutual concern, 
including combatting terrorism. However, foreign influence security concerns are not 
limited to countries deemed hostile to the United States. The Appeal Board has 
cautioned DOHA administrative judge’s against overreliance on “simplistic distinctions 
between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline 
B,” because such “ignores the historical reality that (i) relations between nations can 
shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly; (ii) even friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters that they view as important 
to their vital interests or national security; and (iii) not all cases of espionage against the 
United States have involved nations that were hostile to the United States.” ISCR Case 
No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).8  
 
Applicant’s extended family members and other connections in Pakistan raise the 
foreign influence security concern. Additionally, Applicant and his wife’s connections 
and contact with family members in Pakistan, coupled with the significant terrorism risk 
and human rights conditions in Pakistan, raise a heightened risk of adverse foreign 
influence.9 Accordingly, the following disqualifying conditions were raised:  
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. July 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, a 
clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (emphasis added) (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
7 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative judge must 
consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
8 See also, ISCR Case No. 14-02496 (App. Bd. May 14, 2015) and ISCR Case No. 11-02842 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 7, 2012), where Board upheld adverse determinations involving familial connections to a U.S. ally 
with a past history of espionage-related activity targeting the United States. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 11-06925 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2013) (in light of terrorist threat in Pakistan and 
other country conditions, applicant’s close family members and property interest in Pakistan raise a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation).  
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 An individual with close family members and other connections in a foreign 
country faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle in mitigating security concerns 
raised by such foreign ties. In the present case, Applicant’s burden in mitigating the 
heightened security concerns that he could be influenced or coerced through his foreign 
ties to Pakistan must be examined under the “very heavy burden” standard that is 
generally reserved for cases involving hostile foreign countries.10 Although the United 
States and Pakistan have a mutually cooperative relationship in several key areas, 
terrorist and other extremist groups with interests inimical to the United States operate 
freely in parts of Pakistan and pose a significant threat not only to Pakistan’s 
sovereignty, but also to U.S. national security interests. In light of these circumstances, 
the serious security concerns that are raised by an individual with family members in a 
hostile foreign country are also present in this case.11  
 
 In meeting this higher standard of proof and persuasion, an individual is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”12 However, what factor or combination of factors will mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with family members in such a foreign country 
is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.13 An administrative judge’s predictive judgment 
in these types of cases must be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence 
and consideration of the adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set 
forth in the Directive. A judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011) (“an applicant with family members in a country 
that is hostile to the U.S. bears a ‘very heavy burden’ to show that the family members are not a means of 
coercion or exploitation.”).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 14-02562 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015) (extending very heavy burden standard to 
cases involving applicants with family members in countries facing an existential or internal threat from 
forces hostile to the United States). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
10 
 
 
overarching standard in all security clearance cases, namely, that any doubt raised by 
an applicant’s circumstances must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 I have considered all the foreign influence mitigating conditions and the following 
were raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s foreign relatives and other connections do 
not work directly for the Pakistani government and they do not appear to be any more 
susceptible to pressure or coercion from forces hostile to the United States in Pakistan 
than any other person similarly situated. Nonetheless, the country conditions in Pakistan 
leave this potential mitigating condition unavailable because those whose goals or 
interests are antagonistic to the United States could conceivably attempt to use 
Applicant’s foreign connections, notably, his parents and siblings in Pakistan, as a 
means through which to obtain U.S. information or to otherwise harm the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant established that if a foreign government or entity 
attempted to use his family and friends in Pakistan to obtain classified information that, 
notwithstanding the obvious difficulty, he would repel any such attempt and resolve the 
conflict in favor of protecting U.S. information. In reaching this finding, I considered the 
following record evidence: 
 
(1) Applicant made a conscious decision 15 years ago to leave his country of 
birth and immigrate to the United States. 
 
(2) In the past 15 years, Applicant has created deep ties to the United States, 
notably: 
 
a. He has raised a family in the United States, including three children 
who were born and educated in the United States; 
 
b. He bought a home in the United States that he has lived in with his 
family for the past 12 years;  
 
 
11 
 
 
c. He established a successful professional career and a positive work 
record in the United States;  
 
d. He is actively involved in his local community; and 
 
e. All of his assets, totaling nearly half a million dollars, are in the United 
States.  
 
(3) Applicant has a 10-year track record of properly handling and safeguarding 
sensitive information, including for the past two years as a federal contractor 
working on defense projects. He is conscientious in following rules and 
regulations, to include those pertaining to security. This was confirmed by his 
employer and others, including his family with whom he does not discuss his 
work because he appreciates and follows rules prohibiting employees granted 
access to sensitive information from disclosing such matters with 
unauthorized individuals and those without a need to know.  
 
(4) Applicant disclosed from the outset of the security clearance investigation his 
foreign familial and other connections to Pakistan. He also disclosed the 
frequency of his contact with his foreign connections and the financial support 
he has provided these foreign persons. He continued to cooperate throughout 
the course of the security clearance process, including providing detailed 
information about the financial support he has provided his family members in 
Pakistan. This record evidence tends to show that Applicant would report any 
attempt to influence him through his foreign connections. 
 
(5) Applicant’s poignant and highly credible testimony regarding the significance 
of the oath of allegiance to him and that no matter the cost he would never 
reveal classified information entrusted to his care.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my Guideline B analysis.  
 
 Applicant’s personal character and integrity, which are vital matters to be 
considered in assessing an individual’s suitability for a security clearance, are 
unassailable. He has been candid about his foreign connections throughout the security 
clearance process. Furthermore, I had an opportunity to observe his demeanor while he 
testified. I found him forthcoming and resolute in his ability to resolve any potential 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Accordingly, if any foreign entity were to 
attempt to influence Applicant through his family and friends in Pakistan, he would 
report any such attempt to the appropriate authorities and not succumb to the attempt to 
 
12 
 
 
influence him. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
