 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01893 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 7, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. On September 2, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on October 27, 2015, and it was received on November 17, 2015. Applicant was 
 
2 
 
 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. There were no objections by 
Applicant or Department Counsel to any evidence offered. The Government’s 
documents identified as Items 2 through 9 and Applicant’s documents marked as Items 
10 through 22 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on December 
10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant did not admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a or 1.h. She denied 
the remaining allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She served in the military as an inactive reservist from 
1988 to 1991 and on active duty from 1991 to 2007. She was honorably discharged in 
the paygrade E-5. She married in 1994 and divorced in 1996. She has a child from the 
marriage who is 21 years old. Applicant completed a security clearance application 
(SCA) in December 2008, which is the most current included in the record. After being 
discharged from the military, she was unemployed from November 2007 until January 
2008. She was interviewed by a government investigator in February 2013 and did not 
disclose any other periods of unemployment. She disclosed that she earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2012. In her response to the FORM, she provided a document to 
show that she completed the requirements to participate in a college graduation 
ceremony in November 2015. It is unknown if Applicant completed another degree.1 
  
 During Applicant’s background investigation interview she acknowledged she 
filed bankruptcy under Chapter 13 in December 2009. She explained that in late 2008 
her father became ill, and she was having difficulty paying her bills. Her father’s care 
was her priority. She did not provide any amplifying information regarding what her 
actions were regarding his care and its impact on her finances. She indicated she did 
not recall the list of creditors regarding her bankruptcy, but indicated she had credit 
cards and a car loan that were included in the bankruptcy.2 A review of Applicant’s 
bankruptcy documents shows she listed the following creditors that are included in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o. Applicant disclosed during her 
interview that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f were student loans she had obtained 
in 1989, 1990, and 1991, while attending college and that they were deferred. She 
disclosed that some of the debts brought to her attention by the investigator were in 
collection and she did not recall the status of others. As part of the Chapter 13 wage 
earner plan, she disclosed that she was to pay $480 a month. The bankruptcy 
                                                          
1 Item 2, 22. The college graduation ceremony is for a different institution than Applicant disclosed during 
her 2013 interview. 
 
2 Item 9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
documents show that the bankruptcy was dismissed in March 2011 due to Applicant’s 
failure to make the plan’s payments.3 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by credit reports from January 2009, 
December 2012, February 2013, and February 2014.4 In addition, Applicant responded 
to government interrogatories on April 3, 2014. The interrogatories listed the debts she 
had discussed during her background interview that are now included in the SOR. It 
asked her to provide documentation as to her actions to resolve the debts. Applicant did 
not dispute any of the debts.5  
 
Applicant had a child custody dispute with her ex-husband. She was required to 
pay child support. The state required the child support to be garnished from her wages. 
She paid $500 monthly for child support, which included a portion for arrearages. In her 
interrogatory response she stated: “I have not paid any other accounts. I saved and paid 
2 big sums on the child support. Once the child support is paid off I will pay the other 
debts.”6 In July 2015 her child support requirements were terminated.7 
 
 Applicant acknowledged during his background interview that the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.b ($3,337), was owed to an apartment complex for a broken lease when she vacated 
the apartment in June 2011 without providing notice to the landlord. During her 
interview, she indicated she intended to contact the creditor and resolve the debt. In her 
answer to the SOR, she denied the debt and stated it was no longer on her credit 
report.8  
 
 Applicant indicated in her answer to the SOR that thedebts in ¶¶ 1.i (charged off - 
$927); 1.k (charged off - $493); and 1.m (charged off - $6,877) are not on a February 
2015 credit report. These debts are included in earlier credit reports.9 There is no 
evidence she paid or resolved these debts. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i was opened in 
October 2006, and the last activity on the account was in February 2009. The debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.k was opened in December 2008, and the last activity on the account was in 
January 2009. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m was opened in June 2006, and the last activity on 
the account was in August 2008.  
 
                                                          
3 Items 4, 9. 
 
4 Items 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8.  
 
5 Item 9. 
 
6 Item 9. 
 
7 Item 13. 
 
8 Item 9; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Items 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8, 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant indicated the debts in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,164) and ¶ 1.l ($1,560) are for 
credit cards she reported to the credit bureau as lost or stolen. Her January 2009 credit 
report reflects they were reported as such.10  
  
 Applicant indicated that the student loans in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,037), ¶ 1.e ($684) 
and ¶ 1.f ($1,793) were consolidated and she began participating in a rehabilitation 
program in February 2015. She completed the nine month program in November 2015, 
and her loans were removed from delinquency status. She made her first payment of 
$200 on the new payment plan. She provided supporting documents.11 
 
 In November 2014 Applicant contacted the collection account creditor for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($245), which was for cable service. She paid the collection account 
in November 2015. She provided supporting documents.12 
 
 In her answer to the SOR regarding the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.g ($925), 1.h 
($21,939), and 1.n ($971), Applicant stated they are “a work in progress.” No further 
information was provided by her regarding these debts. The account in SOR ¶ 1.g is a 
telecommunication debt, which was opened in January 2004, and the last activity was 
February 2010; ¶ 1.h is an auto loan account opened in August 2008, and the last 
activity was November 2010; and ¶ 1.n is an account with a bank, which was opened in 
October 2006, and the last activity was March 2009. Applicant stated in her answer: “I 
am working to correct my past mistakes with all parties and fixing my credit history in 
the process.”13 No information was provided by Applicant about the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o 
($90). 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant provided an undated letter from a law firm 
she stated she hired in September 2014 that is helping her with her “credit issues.” She 
indicated that now that her child support payments are complete she can focus on other 
bills. She also indicated that now that she completed college she will use her additional 
resources to pay delinquent debts.14 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
10 Item 3. 
 
11 Answer to SOR; Response to FORM; Items 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
 
12 Item 21. 
 
13 Items 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; Answer to SOR. 
 
14 Items 10, 12. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.15 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2009. She failed to make the payments 
on the plan and it was dismissed in March 2011. Applicant had numerous delinquent 
debts totaling approximately $42,952. Some have been delinquent since at least 2008. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of both of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that are not resolved. Some of the debts alleged 
in the SOR are no longer listed on her 2015 credit report. She failed to provide evidence 
that they were resolved or paid. Applicant’s delinquent debts are still being addressed. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. Her failure to timely address her delinquent debts casts doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant indicated she began having financial problems when her father became 
ill in late 2008. She did not elaborate on the specific financial impact her father’s illness 
had on her. She had a period of unemployment after leaving the military. These 
conditions were beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is evidence she 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2009, but failed to maintain the required monthly 
payments and it was dismissed. In 2015, after receiving the SOR, Applicant began a 
rehabilitation program regarding her student loans. She hired a law firm to help her with 
credit issues. In November 2015, she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. Her failure to 
complete her Chapter 13 payment plan and failure to take action on debts until after she 
received the SOR does not show she acted responsibly. Applicant has debts that are no 
longer on her most current 2015 credit report. There is no evidence that she paid them 
or took action to resolve them. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Applicant hired a law firm to help her resolve her credit issues. I assume that she 
is receiving some type of financial counseling from the firm. She has paid one small 
debt and her student loans have been removed from delinquency status. Her actions 
show that she is attempting to address some of her delinquent debts. However, her 
response that some debts are a “work in progress” indicate that there are not yet clear 
indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies. 
 
Applicant’s obtained her student loans in 1989, 1990, and 1991. Although they 
may have been deferred for a period, it cannot be overlooked that she did not take 
action to start to pay them until February 2015, more than 25 years from when she 
received her first loan. She participated in a rehabilitation program and has made one 
payment since the loans were removed from delinquency status. She paid the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c, but none of the other debts alleged have been resolved. AG ¶ 20(d) 
marginally applies to these debts. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant denied all of the debts in the SOR and did not respond to two of the 
allegations. There is sufficient evidence to conclude the debts alleged belonged to her. 
The fact that some of the debts are not listed on her most recent credit report does not 
mean that she resolved them. She disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l indicating 
her credit cards were lost or stolen. The dispute is noted on one of the credit reports. I 
find in her favor on these allegations. Applicant did not provide documentary proof to 
dispute the legitimacy of the remaining debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. She served in the military and received an honorable 
discharge. Applicant has a history of financial problems dating from at least 2008. She 
filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2009, but failed to make the required payments, and it 
was dismissed in 2011. After receiving the SOR, she began to address her delinquent 
student loans and she paid one small debt. Some of her debts are no longer included 
on a recent credit report. Applicant did not provide evidence that she resolved these 
debts. She indicated other remaining debts are a “work in progress” but failed to 
articulate what that meant. Although Applicant is now working with a law firm to help her 
with her credit issues, she does not have a reliable track record to conclude her 
finances are stable and she will be diligent in following through on resolving her financial 
problems. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
