KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s assertion that he believed his security officer had submitted his
documentation does not demonstrate that he was denied due process in light of the record as a
whole.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05920.a1
DATE: 01/08/2016
DATE: January 8, 2016
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05920
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 22, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a decision on
the written record.  On October 30, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In 2005, Applicant and his wife purchased a house for $440,000, financing the purchase
through a mortgage.  They later took out a home equity line of credit (HELOC).  Subsequently,
Applicant became unemployed for seven months, and he also divorced.  Applicant fell behind on
his mortgage payments as well as on other debts.  
Applicant thought about selling his house but it had depreciated by $200,000 since he bought
it.  He hired an attorney, who helped him execute a voluntary foreclosure.  The foreclosure sale
resulted in a deficiency of $160,000.  Applicant’s HELOC was not included in this transaction.  He
negotiated a settlement agreement whereby he will pay $200 a month, though as of the date of the
SOR he had not received a copy of this agreement.  Applicant disputes one of the SOR debts and
claims that he has paid off others.  He provided no corroboration for this assertion.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debts resulted from circumstances beyond his
control–unemployment, divorce, and his inability to sell his house.  He noted that Applicant
consulted with an attorney in an effort to resolve this debts.  However, he stated that Applicant had
provided no additional evidence in support of his claims to have been addressing his debts.  The
Judge concluded, therefore, that Applicant had failed to mitigate the concerns arising from his
financial problems.
Discussion
Applicant states that he thought that his facility security officer had submitted all of his
documentation.  He states that he believed that “the packet I received was the copies of what was
to be submitted.”  He also states that no one advised him that it was best to present his case at a
hearing.  Appeal Brief at 1.  Applicant’s argument asserts matters from outside the record, which
we are generally precluded from considering.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we will consider new
evidence insofar as it bears upon questions of jurisdiction or due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2015). 
1Some of the documents that Applicant has attached to his appeal brief post-date his deadline to respond to the
FORM and, in some cases, the Judge’s Decision itself.  
3
The record contains a copy of a document that DOHA prepared and sent to Applicant in
conjunction with the SOR, whereby Applicant made his election as to forum.  Applicant checked
the block requesting a decision on the written record.  This document stated that Applicant would
have an opportunity to provide written evidence for the Judge’s consideration.  
Subsequently, Department Counsel sent Applicant the File of Relevant Material (FORM).
The FORM included guidance to Applicant that the record as it then stood was not sufficient to
mitigate the concerns in his case.  It stated, among other things, that Applicant had 30 days 
in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal,
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate.  If you do not file any
objections or submit any additional information within 30 days of receipt of this
letter, your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination base
solely on this FORM. 
DOHA officials provided similar guidance in a cover letter, dated May 20, 2015, that
accompanied the FORM.  This letter advised that Applicant could submit “any material you wish
the Administrative Judge to consider” within 30 days of receipt.  DOHA also provided Applicant
with a copy of the Directive, which contains a detailed explanation of an applicant’s rights and
responsibilities.  
Under the circumstances, Applicant’s failure to have provided a written response to the
FORM cannot fairly be attributed to an absence of clear guidance regarding his rights.  Neither has
he provided a reason to believe that  he submitted documents that did not make it into the record.1
Beyond this, we are unable to determine with any degree of certitude exactly what error that
Applicant is raising.  Therefore, any argument beyond those addressed above fails for lack of
specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06691 at 3 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011).  Although Applicant
may now be dissatisfied with his choice of forum, there is nothing in the record or in his appeal brief
that would persuade a reasonable person that his election of a decision on the written record was
other than knowing and intelligent.  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by the
Directive.  
Applicant’s brief draws our attention to documents that were included in the record.
Applicant’s brief is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).  Neither is it sufficient
to show that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence. 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
4
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billet              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
