KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Para 6.4 of the Directive permits temporary suspension of a clearance under certain
circumstances.  However, clearance eligibility in DOHA proceedings is governed by the
Guidelines and procedures set forth in Enclosures 2 and 3 of the Directive.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-05238.a1
DATE: 01/13/2016
DATE: January 13, 2016
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05238
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Edward O. Lear, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 13, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On October 14, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal:  Applicant
first used marijuana while in the seventh grade.  He used it occasionally on weekends.  He stated at
the hearing that he had used marijuana 20 to 30 times in his life.  He claimed that he had not used
marijuana for long periods of time, including 1980 to 1985 and 2001 to 2006.  He did not do so
again until 2012.  In 2005, Applicant completed a public trust questionnaire, in which he denied
having used any controlled substance during the previous year.  In 2009, he was asked a similar
question on another such questionnaire, again answering in the negative.  In his 2012 security
clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that his first use of marijuana had been in 1977.
He stated that he smoked it only on weekends, about twice a month.  In a subsequent clearance
interview, Applicant stated that he had used marijuana from 1977 to 2012 on weekends, twice
monthly.  In addition to his marijuana use, Applicant was arrested for DUI in 2007.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated an appropriate period of
abstinence from marijuana use.  She stated that, based on his past conduct, she was not satisfied that
the Guideline H concerns are behind him.  Regarding the Guideline E allegations of falsification
described above, the Judge stated that Applicant’s testimony about limited marijuana use is not
consistent with the statements in his SCA or that he made during the clearance interview.  She stated
that his answers to the 2005 and 2009 application questions had been dishonest, as had his hearing
testimony.  She also stated that, although not alleged, he had not fully disclosed alcohol-related
convictions in his 2012 SCA.  Although Applicant had not used marijuana since 2012, the Judge
found that he had used marijuana while a mature adult and while knowing that such use was illegal.
She entered adverse findings under both Guidelines.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that his presentation lacked credibility.  We give
deference to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  The record supports the
Judge’s finding that Applicant made inconsistent statements about the extent of his marijuana use.
Inconsistent statements can impair a witness’s or an applicant’s credibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-01056 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 17, 2015).  
Applicant contends that the evidence does not support a conclusion that he poses an
imminent threat to national security, citing to Directive ¶ 6.4.  However, that paragraph’s temporary
suspension process was not applied in this case by DOHA.  DOHA proceedings to adjudicate an
applicant’s final clearance eligibility are conducted under the Guidelines and procedures set forth
in Enclosures 2 and 3.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 93-0332 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1994) for the
proposition that ¶ 6.4 is limited in scope and that as a general matter the Government does not have
3
to prove a “‘clear and present danger’ to national security” before it can deny an applicant a
clearance.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions and whole-person
factors.  However, Applicant’s use of marijuana from 1977 to 2012, his false statements on the
public trust questionnaires, and the Judge’s credibility determination support her adverse decision.
The use of an illegal drug can raise questions about an applicant’s ability or willingness to comply
with laws, rules, and regulations.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 24.  Refusal to provide full, frank, and
truthful answers to lawful questions of investigators and other officials in connection with a security
clearance or trustworthiness investigation “will normally result in an unfavorable clearance
action[.]” Decision, Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.         
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
