1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04618
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 20, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 23, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to
this AJ on February 18, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 23, 2015,
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 5, 2015. 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibit
A, which was also admitted without objection. The record was kept open until May 19,
2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. The documents that were timely
2
received have been identified and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits B
through D. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript
of the hearing (Tr) on May 13, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits,
and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 34 years old.  She is not married, and she has no children. She was
previously married from 1999 to 2005. Applicant is a senior in college, where she is
majoring in business and psychology. She served in the United States Air Force from
1999 to 2003, when she received an Honorable Discharge. Applicant is employed as a
Fight Operations Manager, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with
her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. Both SOR allegations will be
discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a mortgage account that went to
foreclosure in the amount of $175,000. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her
RSOR, and she wrote that this debt arose as a result of an investment property that she
purchased. Because of the poor economy she was unable to find a renter for the house.
She paid the mortgage for the house for two years without a tenant, but after an
appraisal she made a determination that her only option was “let the house go.” She
worked with a real estate agent for ten months with the goal of short selling the house,
but she was unsuccessful, and, ultimately, the house was foreclosed. In her RSOR,
Applicant contended that this debt will remain on her credit reports for seven to 10
years, but, “I will be afforded participation in the Mortgage Forgiveness Debt Relief Act
of 2007 due to the economic meltdown and have been advised that I will receive tax
information regarding this matter shortly.” (Emphasis in the original.)
At the hearing, Applicant testified that she purchased the house for
approximately $190,000, and she purchased it because she was informed that the area
where it was located was going to be gentrified, but it never materialized. She estimated
that she made payments for three years in total before she attempted to short-sell the
house. During the period she was making payments she tried to get a renter but was
not successful. When she tried to make the short-sale she had some potential buyers
but the bank/creditor refused each sale. Ultimately, the bank sold the house for less
than the amount she could have sold it in a short sale. (Tr at 29-39.)
3
Applicant testified that she spoke to a representative of the bank/creditor after
she received the SOR, and she was told that she did not owe anything to them under
the Mortgage Forgiveness Debt Relief Act, but she would be receiving an IRS Form
1099 showing that the loan had been forgiven. (Tr at 36-37.) Exhibit 2 is the full credit
report dated March 27, 2014, and it shows that this debt had been foreclosed, but the
past due is $0. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $1,027. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and she wrote she paid
this debt in the amount of $1,027.03 on March 20, 2014, and the creditor confirmed that
this debt has been resolved.
At the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt was for an education loan, but
she dropped the class when she became deployed. She did not receive the bill until
she returned in March 2014, and when she learned of the debt she paid the debt almost
immediately. (Tr at 30-33.) The credit report of May 5, 2015, showed that the balance
due to this creditor is $0. (Exhibit A.) I find that this debt has been resolved. 
  
Applicant testified that her financial situation is stable, and she is not overdue
with any of her current financial obligations. (Tr at 52-53.) 
Mitigation
Applicant testified that she owns another house, for which she has a renter, and
she is current on the loan for the mortgage on this house. (Tr at 35-36; Exhibit A.) She
also submitted three extremely laudatory characters letter. She was described as
having “excellent moral character.” (Exhibit B.) Finally, Applicant submitted a Personal
Financial Statement showing three sources of income and a number of expenses, but
the information was less that complete so it does not add significant insight into the
Applicant’s financial status. (Exhibit C.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence established that
Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt to two creditors.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As
reviewed above, Applicant’s largest debt, the mortgage on her rental home, became
overdue because of the downturn in the economy. Her second debt was simply not
resolved because Applicant was deployed and did not receive the bill for this debt until
her deployment ended. I find Applicant has acted responsibly in attempting to resolve
her debts. As reviewed above, Applicant made payments for two or three years on the
mortgage for her rental home, even though she could not obtain a renter. Then when
she determined that she could not continue to make payments on this house, she
attempted to short-sell the house. While she did receive offers, no offer she received
was accepted by the bank. She now has been informed by the bank that she does not
owe anything for this house. Also, when Applicant finally learned of the second debt,
she paid it off almost immediately. I find that this mitigating condition is applicable and
controlling in this case. 
I also find that ¶ 20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has “initiated a good-faith
effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Finally, I find that
Applicant’s overall financial situation is stable and secure, and therefore, I find Guideline
F for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a classified position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the evidence that
establishes that Applicant has resolved her past-due debts listed on the SOR, together
with her honorable service in the United States Air Force, I find that the record evidence
leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b.: For  Applicant  
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
