 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03397 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on collection 
and charged-off accounts, a judgment, two vehicle repossessions, unpaid federal taxes, 
overpayment of state unemployment compensation, and a home foreclosure. He has 
more than $46,000 in delinquent debt. He asserted, but failed to document, that he paid 
his delinquent federal tax obligation and is repaying the state unemployment 
compensation. Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 30, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
security concerns. On November 16, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to 
have the matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 9, 2015. The FORM contained six attachments 
(Items 1-6). On August 26, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. His response was due on September 
25, 2015. On October 15, 2015, Applicant stated he had no objections or additional 
information to provide as to the material he had received. On November 11, 2015, I was 
assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing all but two of the delinquent 
debts. He asserted he paid his federal income tax debt (SOR 1.o, $1,618) and had 
established a repayment plan to repay his unemployment compensation debt (SOR 1.p, 
$10,729) I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as to the delinquent obligations, but not 
as to his assertions of payment, as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old trade assistant who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2013 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) Since 
November 2011, he has worked two days a week as a ramp agent. In March 2011, he 
was divorced ending his ten-year marriage. (Item 3) He has two children, ages 10 and 
14. (Item 3) He asserts is not required to pay child support or spousal support. (Item 6) 
He provided no information about his duty performance and provided no character 
reference letters. 
 
 From February 2001 through May 2009, Applicant worked for a health and 
rehabilitation center. In May 2009, he was transferred to a subcontractor. Shortly after 
the transfer, he quit when informed he would be fired. He incorrectly received 
unemployment compensation (SOR 1.p, $10,729) after leaving the job. In December 
2009, the state requested the return of the funds. (Item 6) From February 2010 to 
January 2011, he made $400 monthly payments to repay the debt. In March 2013, his 
wages at his part-time job were garnished, and, as of March 2013, $50 had been taken 
from his pay. (Item 6) In March 2013, Applicant had a personal subject interview (PSI). 
(Item 6) At that time, he said he intended to contact the state and restart the $400 
monthly payments. He asserts he is currently making payment on this debt. However, 
the FORM stated Applicant had provided no receipts or evidence of regular payment on 
the debt. He was informed he could submit a documentary response to the FORM. In 
his response, he stated he had no additional information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 In 2009, Applicant had a job from May through September 2009. (ltem 6) When 
he became unemployed, he left the state and moved to a location closer to relatives. 
From December 2009 through February 2011, he worked as a pipefitter at a shipyard. 
(Item 3) From February through June 2011, he was unemployed. From June through 
September 2011, he again worked as a pipefitter. From September 2011 through 
November 2012, he was unemployed. (Item 3) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant’s now ex-wife purchased a home for $132,000. In 2005, 
Applicant and his then-wife refinanced the home with two mortgages of $173,000 and 
$44,000, with a combined monthly mortgage payments of $1,600. (Item 4, 6) In 
November 2008, the larger mortgage holder offered to reduce the monthly mortgage 
payments to $800. (Item 6) Applicant was more than $57,000 past due on this 
mortgage. (Item 4) A financial settlement was accepted on the $44,000 owed on the 
smaller mortgage. (Item 4) In December 2009, Applicant and his wife separated, and he 
stopped making mortgage payments, and the house went to foreclosure (SOR 1.q). 
(Item 6) 
 
 Applicant had two vehicles financed through a credit union that were voluntarily 
repossessed. (Item 6) One was repossessed in 2010.2 He has made no payments on 
the amounts owed (SOR 1.c, $4,279 and SOR 1.d, $3,201) after 2009, when he moved 
to a new state. Applicant owed $3,000 in federal income tax for tax year 2010. (Item 6) 
Following the interception of a tax refund, the amount owed was reduced to $1,618 
(SOR 1.o) He asserts he has paid this debt, but provided no documentation showing 
payment.  
 
On Applicant’s March 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he listed 11 of the SOR delinquent accounts, including a $150 
medical debt. (Item 3) In Applicant’s March 2013 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), his 
delinquent accounts were discussed. He recognized many of his delinquent obligations. 
At that time, he stated he had no credit cards, owes no money on his car, and had not 
received financial counseling. He intended to seek legal advice as to his delinquent 
obligations. (Item 6) He thought he might need to seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection.  
 
The delinquent SOR obligations are set forth in Applicant’s April 2013 and May 
2014 credit reports. (Items 4, 5) Additionally, Applicant acknowledged owing the debts 
except for his delinquent tax obligation, which he said he paid and the repayment of the 
unemployment compensation, which he said he was repaying. (Item 2) The SOR 
includes four charged-off accounts, eight collection accounts, a $460 judgment, 
delinquent taxes, a home foreclosure, two vehicle repossessions, and unemployment 
compensation repayment, which total more than $46,000. (Item 1) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
2 The date of the second repossession is not clear from the file. 
 
4 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
5 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is more than $46,000 past due on two voluntary repossessions, a 
judgment, four charged-off accounts, eight collection accounts, and is delinquent on 
repayment of unemployment compensation. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has been 
employed with his current employer since February 2013 and with a part-time employer 
since November 2012. In April 2013, he was made aware of the Government’s 
concerns about his delinquent debt when questioned about his delinquent obligations 
during his PSI. He acknowledged many of the delinquent obligations and indicated he 
was going to seek legal assistance to help him address his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant asserted he paid his federal tax obligation for tax year 2010 and was 
repaying his unemployment compensation debt. However, he provided no 
documentation supporting his assertions. He was informed in the FORM he could 
provide additional documents, but in his response to the FORM, he stated he was not 
providing any additional documents. He provided no information showing he paid any of 
the obligations or any documentation concerning legal services or advice he received. 
There is no documentation that even the $150 medical debt had been addressed.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He 
has not demonstrated that his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan 
to bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. In 2009, he was fired from his 
job and was unemployed for four months. He was then employed for 14 months before 
being unemployed for four months in 2011. He was also unemployed from September 
2011 through November 2012. Additionally, in 2009, he separated from his wife and 
divorced in March 2011. Having learned of the Government’s concern over his 
delinquent obligations in April 2013, he has not provided documentation showing he has 
made any payments on his debts. Given sufficient opportunity to address his financial 
delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. 
Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies, but is insufficient to mitigate the security concern. 
He was divorced in March 2011 and periodically unemployed between May 2009 and 
November 2012. These are events beyond his control. However, he failed to document 
how those events of more than three and almost five years ago affect his current 
finances. By failing to show any payments, he has failed to show he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
7 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is no showing his financial 
obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply because Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent 
accounts even though he asserted he had paid his delinquent tax bill and was repaying 
his unemployment compensation obligation. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 
20(e) does not apply because he had admitted the obligations and is not disputing 
them.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has failed to document 
any payment on his delinquent accounts. He was made aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts by his April 2013 PSI, the October 2014 SOR, and 
the July 2015 FORM. Even the $150 medical debt has yet to be paid. There is no 
documentation any delinquent debts have been paid or that he has had recently 
contacted his creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts that would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By relying solely on the scant 
explanation in response to the SOR, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. 
 
 
8 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  Against Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
