 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02170 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position1  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR. She did not indicate 
whether she wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or a decision on the 
written record. She later verified that she wanted a hearing. The case was assigned to 
                                                          
1 The SOR inaccurately described this as a security clearance case. The caption was amended at the 
hearing to accurately reflect this as an ADP public trust position case. 
 
 
2 
another administrative judge on February 25, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 26, 2015, scheduling the 
hearing for March 26, 2015. The hearing was continued at Applicant’s request because 
of medical reasons.  
 
The case was reassigned to me on August 13, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as rescheduled on September 15, 2015. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit any 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 23, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since October 2013. She is applying for eligibility to hold a public 
trust position. She attended college for a period, but she did not earn a degree. She has 
never married. She has an eight-year-old child.2 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment before she 
obtained her current job. She did not always have medical insurance, which resulted in 
medical debts. She does not receive child support from her child’s father. She was 
unable to pay all her bills, and debts became delinquent.3 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts. Each debt is listed on a credit report from 
November 2013. Medical debts ranging from $40 to $759 and totaling about $2,744 
comprise eight of the SOR allegations. The remaining debts consist of a past-due car 
loan ($796 past due; $9,600 balance), a debt to a bank ($408), a payday loan ($758), a 
telecommunications debt ($750), and two cable television debts ($180 and $179). 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts except for the two cable television debts, which 
she said she paid because the company would not provide her with cable television 
service if she did not pay the debts. She did not provide documentation of those 
payments. Applicant has had several cars repossessed. She also had a car that was 
wrecked and “totaled.” In her background interview in November 2013, she stated that 
the past-due car loan alleged in the SOR resulted in the car being repossessed. At her 
hearing, she stated that the past-due car loan was for the wrecked car.4 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. She stated that she did not have 
the money to pay her debts. She stated that she would like to go back to college, get a 
degree, and become a real estate agent. She stated that she would then have the extra 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 16; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 15-17; GE 1-3. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-21, 24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. The additional repossessed cars were not 
alleged in the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be used in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 
income that she could use to pay her debts. She has a 2011 car. She is delinquent on a 
student loan. She stated that she will pay the student loan with her next income tax 
refund. She stated that she has “to pay that off so [she] can go back to school.”5  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 15, 21-24; GE 2. 
 
4 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 
5 
  Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment before she 
obtained her current job. She did not always have medical insurance, which resulted in 
medical debts. She does not receive child support from her child’s father. Those events 
were beyond her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant paid the two cable television debts because the company would not 
provide her with cable television service if she did not pay the debts. Those debts are 
mitigated. She stated that she will pay her delinquent student loan so that she will be 
able to go back to school. No other debts have been paid. She has a 2011 car, but she 
has not been able to pay a $40 medical debt.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
 
6 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
